The Project Gutenberg EBook of Woodside, by Caroline Hadley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Woodside
       or, Look, Listen, and Learn.

Author: Caroline Hadley

Release Date: April 25, 2006 [EBook #18256]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOODSIDE ***




Produced by Susan Skinner, Ross Wilburn and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






WOODSIDE



[Illustration: THE VISIT TO THE WATCH-DOG.
_Page 13._]


Thomas Nelson and Sons,

_LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK._


[Illustration: THE ARRIVAL AT GRANDPAPA'S.
_Page 10._]



WOODSIDE

OR,

_Look, Listen, and Learn._

BY

Caroline Hadley,

AUTHOR OF "CHILDREN'S SAYINGS," "STORIES OF OLD,"
"STORIES OF THE APOSTLES,"
ETC. ETC.

London:

T. NELSON AND SONS, PATERNOSTER ROW.
EDINBURGH; AND NEW YORK.
1902


"And Nature, the old nurse, took
  The child upon her knee,
Saying: 'Here is a story-book
  Thy Father has written for thee.

"'Come wander with me,' she said,
  'Into regions yet untrod,
And read what is still unread
  Of the manuscripts of God.'

"And he wandered away and away
  With Nature, the dear old nurse,
Who sang to him night and day
  The rhymes of the universe."

H. W. LONGFELLOW.


Contents.


I. GRANDPAPA'S HOUSE,                                                  9

II. LISTENING IN THE WOODS,                                           17

III. TOM'S BIRDS' EGGS,                                               27

IV. JACK AND THE GARDENER,                                            36

V. HIVING THE BEES,                                                   47

VI. WASPS AND THEIR WAYS,                                             58

VII. CHARLEY FOSTER'S PETS,                                           66

VIII. A TALK WITH AUNT LIZZIE,                                        80

IX. AFTER THE RAIN,                                                   95

X. THE SIX CLOSED DOORS,                                             105


List of Illustrations.


THE ARRIVAL AT GRANDPAPA'S,       _Frontispiece_

THE VISIT TO THE WATCH-DOG,        _Vignette_

THE VISIT TO THE PONY,                                                13

TOM SHOWING THE REDBREAST'S EGGS,                                     29

JACK AND THE THRUSH'S NEST,                                           36

REYNARD HARD PUSHED,                                                  45

CHARLEY FOSTER'S COLLECTION,                                          68

THE TEA ON THE LAWN,                                                  82






WOODSIDE.




I.

_GRANDPAPA'S HOUSE._

"Now for the dear, dear country,
  Its trees and meadows fair,
Its roses, cowslips, violets,
  Whose sweetness fills the air.

"'Tis there we hear the music
  Of lark's and blackbird's song,
And merry little finches,
  Singing the whole day long."--C. H.


One bright spring day, not so very long ago, three little children
arrived at their grandfather's house. They had come to pay a long visit,
as their parents were travelling abroad for two or three months.

Now grandpapa lived less than twenty miles from London, yet his house
was quite in the country,--indeed you might have thought that it was a
hundred miles away from any town,--and it was called Woodside.

You may be sure that Jack, Mary, and Annie--for those were the names of
the children--thought the change from London most delightful.

Jack was the eldest--that is why I have put his name before those of his
sisters--and he was ten years old. Mary was the next in age, and she was
nearly nine; while Annie, the youngest, was seven.

On the day they arrived they felt very quiet, all was so strange after
London; besides, they were busy unpacking their toys and picture-books,
and in finding places for all their treasures in the rooms grandmamma
had set apart for them.

They went to bed early too, and never once woke till their nurse called
them in the morning. At first they felt sorry it was time to get up, but
when Jane drew up the blinds, and they saw the bright sunshine and the
clear blue sky, they made haste to dress, so that after breakfast was
over they might go out of doors.

Each of them had visited at Woodside several times before, but they had
not been all together there at the same time. They knew very well how
many interesting things there were to see out of doors, and they hoped
that there would be something new. There was sure to be a difference
among the animals and flowers.

The old house looked the same as they drove up to it, with its twenty
oak trees in a semi-circle and the gates in the middle. There was the
same watch-dog, Lion; and on the parlour hearth-rug, lying curled up in
the sunshine, lay Smut, grandmamma's large black cat.

A very respectable old gentleman was Smut, with his sleek, glossy coat;
but he stood too much on his dignity ever to play. The children coaxed
him and patted him; yet he took no notice, he just curled himself round
and went to sleep again.

A proud old cat was Smut; he would never touch food or milk in the
kitchen. His food was put on a plate for him out of doors, and he had
his milk in a saucer in the parlour. When he was out of doors, he always
came in again by the front door, never at the back.

The children soon spied something new in the shape of a long-haired
kitten, whose fur was gray and soft. She was bright and lively, and was
very pleased to play with the children; for Smut would never take any
notice of her, or play with her one bit: so she and the children became
very good friends, and had many a game together.

After breakfast was over, grandmamma told the children they might put on
their hats and go out of doors. They did not need to be spoken to twice.

First of all they had a run round the garden, peeped into the
greenhouse, and said "How do you do?" to the gardener. But they did not
stop long among the lovely spring flowers, for they were in such haste
to see the animals.

[Illustration: THE VISIT TO THE PONY.
_Page 13._]

Jack said, "We must pay our first visit to the pony;" so away they went
to the stable.

The pony was very sober and steady, and, I am sorry to add, rather lazy;
so the children did not get much fun out of him. He lifted up his head
and gave a little neigh to Jack, for he seemed to remember him; and then
he went on eating his hay in the most unconcerned manner.

They then went to see the large dog in the yard. Lion was very glad to
see them. He harked with delight, wagged his tail, rattled his chain; in
fact he seemed as if he would break away from it, in his eagerness to
meet the children.

"Lion is ever so much nicer than the pony," they said.

The fact was, the pony had not much work to do, and his chief thoughts
were about his hay and his corn and his nice warm stable. Now Lion,
although he was generally chained to his kennel, had to watch for
others. He was always listening to hear if any one came upon the
premises who had no business there; and he barked so loudly that tramps
and idle people thought it best to go away. He always welcomed the
gardener and the servants, and especially his master, whenever they came
to see him; so that every one about the place would give a pat or a word
to the friendly dog whenever they passed that way.

"Now let us go and see the fowls," said Mary.

On the right hand side of the drive up to the house was a wide strip of
grass planted with shrubs. Here, standing back, were some wire
enclosures inside of which were some choice broods of chickens.

The girls could have stopped here "for hours," they said, watching the
little chickens, that looked like balls of white or yellow or gray down
running about or hiding under their mothers' wings.

However, most of the fowls were in the orchard, close by which was the
hen-house. Fancy what a pretty sight that orchard was this sunshiny
spring morning! How alive with different sorts of fowls running hither
and thither--black, and gray, and speckled; old motherly hens, and pert,
lively young ones; while the cocks strutted about and crowed one against
another. Then a hen would come out of the hen-house, where the nests
were, telling all the world, by her loud, proud cackling, that she had
laid an egg. What noise there was then, for cocks and hens would all
join in chorus. Some of the hens seemed to get together to have a quiet
chat, as if they were talking over their family affairs; about which
they did not always seem to agree, if you might judge by their noise.

By this time grandpapa had finished reading his newspaper and came to
the children. He took them to the cow-house to see the new calf, and he
lifted Annie up to let her stroke it; but the mother looked so fierce
that they did not care to stay long there. Then they went into the yard
to see the pigs. The little pigs looked so funny running about the
large, clean sty, as if they loved the bright sunshine and liked to play
about in it. But when they fed they would put their feet in the trough,
and this was not very mannerly of them.

By the time the children had paid a visit to all the old places they
were getting rather tired, and then they went back to the house.




II.

_LISTENING IN THE WOODS._

"I hear the blackbird telling
  His love-tale to his mate;
And the merry skylark swelling
  The choir at 'heaven's gate.'
The cuckoo away in the thicket
  Is giving his two old notes;
And the pet doves hung by the wicket
  Are talking with ruffled throats.
The honey-bee hums as he lingers
  Where shadows on clover heads fall;
And the wind with leaf-tipped fingers,
  Is playing in concert with all."

ELIZA COOK.


Now grandpapa's house, Woodside, stood on the side of a wood; in fact
there was only a grassy road between the gates and the wood itself.

Such a wood! with large old elms and oaks and other trees. In the more
open spaces were trees and bushes of hawthorn, now completely covered
with white blossom, the pretty May-bloom. There too grew primroses,
violets, wild hyacinths, besides a long list of other wild flowers,
ferns, and feathery green moss.

One fine day grandmamma took the children herself across the road into
the wood. She sat down in one of the open spaces upon the trunk of a
fallen tree, while the children played at hide-and-seek among the bushes
or picked the wild flowers.

By-and-by they came back to grandmamma, who was reading while they were
playing about, and said, "Grandmamma, will you tell us about papa when
he was a little boy?"

Grandmamma took off her spectacles, shut her book, and the children sat
down quite close to her, on the grass at her feet.

Then she began:--"When your father and your uncle and aunts, were about
as old as you are now, they came with me into this very place one summer
day.

"After they had played awhile they came to me, and I said to them,
'Children, what do you hear?'

"'Hear, mother?' they said; 'why, nothing in particular. What _is_ there
to hear?'

"'Well,' I said, 'now all of you shut your eyes and listen, and don't
speak till I tell you.'

"After a short time I told them to open their eyes; and I asked John,
who was the eldest, what he had heard.

"'First of all I heard the birds singing, then I noticed that there were
different sorts of birds singing: I heard the blackbird, the thrush, the
little finches, and the warblers--I could not tell you how many; some of
them singing as if they could not make sound enough, and others sung a
low song, with twitterings and chatterings all to themselves. Some
seemed calling to birds a long way off; then I heard those other birds
answer, but the sound was so faint that I should not have heard it at
all if we had not been so still. I was trying to catch a faint sound of
a bird some distance down the wood, which sounded like the coo of the
wood-pigeon, when you said, "Open your eyes."'

"Then I turned to Harry--your father, children--and he said, 'Of course
I heard the birds, but I thought, I can hear them any day; I shall
listen for all sorts of odd sounds. I heard the distant rumble of a
farmer's waggon, and the cows lowing at Brown's farm; every now and
again I heard the sound of the village blacksmith's hammer, the faint
puffing of a train, a man's footsteps coming through the wood, and the
voices of boys--after birds' nests, I suppose.'

"'Well, Lizzie, what did you hear?' I asked, turning to one of the
girls.

"'I heard the wind moving very gently among the trees, making a soft
rustling noise. I could scarcely believe in the difference there is
between this quiet sound and the roaring of the wind in a storm. Then I
heard the wild bee's hum, and the little tiny noises made by the small
creatures that live in the wood. I heard our gardener sharpening his
scythe, and the trickling of the brook in the hollow.'

"'Now, little Fanny, tell us what you heard.'

"'I heard the hens cackling and calling to their chickens. I thought I
heard our dog bark; but all was so warm, and still, and sleepy, that I
felt as if I should go to sleep too if I kept my eyes shut much longer.
I heard the birds though, and a great bumble-bee that flew by when our
eyes were shut.'

"'Now, children,' I said, 'you have all heard something, and yet a
little while ago you told me there was nothing particular to hear; nor
is there, if you hear without listening.'"

Here grandmamma stopped awhile, then, looking at the grandchildren at
her feet, said there was a poet once who wrote about a little girl
called Lucy. She lived among all the beautiful things that are to be
seen in the country, and she loved them dearly. The poet thought how, as
she grew up, she would be yet more and more charmed by them, and that
loving all grand and beautiful natural objects would make her charming.
Among other things he said,--

       "She shall lean her ear
  In many a secret place,
And beauty born of murmuring sound
  Shall pass into her face."

"How can sound show itself in a face, grandmamma?" asked Jack.

"Supposing you heard a loud, sudden scream, you would be startled and
frightened by the cry; if you heard a tremendous clap of thunder, you
might look a little frightened too, but you would also look solemn and
still as you heard the grand sound; but you would have quite another
look if you were lying on your back under a shady tree some calm summer
evening, listening to the low song of the birds, and to the many sounds
that are almost silence."

"Cuckoo! cuckoo!"

"O grandmamma, there's the cuckoo!" cried all the children at once.

"Yes; there are a great many cuckoos about here. They say it is only the
male bird that calls 'Cuckoo,' that the female simply makes a chattering
sound."

"Did you ever see a cuckoo, grandma?"

"No, never a live bird, only one stuffed. I will tell you a story of how
I heard one once. It was about five-and-twenty years ago. I wanted some
primroses for a nosegay. I used to pick the long feathery moss that
grows in these woods and put the primroses among it. I ran across the
road outside of our gates--for I could run in those days--and soon
filled my basket with as many primroses as I wanted. As I was standing
under a large tree, I heard all at once, exactly over my head, a loud,
gruff cry of 'Cuckoo.' I was so startled, the cry was so near, that I
thought it must be a rude man, and I dropped all my primroses and ran
back to the gates.

"Then I thought, 'How foolish of me to be frightened; it is the 18th of
April, the right time for the cuckoo to come back to England from the
warm country where he has been all the winter,--of course it is a real
cuckoo.' So I went back and picked up my primroses, but I heard no more
of that cuckoo.

"I told my children when I came indoors about my adventure; and how they
did laugh at their mother for being frightened at a bird.

"I shall always think, though, that that particular cuckoo must have
caught a bad cold on his long journey to England, or soon after his
arrival, for his voice sounded as if he had a sore throat."

"Now children," said grandmamma, rising from her seat, "it is time we
walked homewards."

As they came near to the house they saw Smut sitting on the door-step,
waiting patiently to be let in at the front door.

Within a short distance of the house was a brook, almost hidden in
places by overhanging bushes and long reedy grass. Then it flowed into
more open ground; but it was very quiet in its flow, for the bed was
soft and not stony.

Of course the next day the children set off for this brook, to listen to
its "murmuring sound." Jack lay down upon the ground and leaned his
head over the brook, thinking he could hear better in that fashion. Mary
said she should sit down by a bend in the stream and be comfortable, for
she was sure she could not listen well if she were afraid of rolling
into the water; while little Annie sat by her sister's side, holding her
hand and shutting her eyes.

If you had seen those children then, you would have wondered what they
were doing, they were so serious and intent; but by the quiet look upon
their faces they seemed to enjoy the music of the softly-flowing stream.
So low was the sound, that you would hardly have noticed it if you had
not been thinking about it.

Often during this visit they would have games at "harking," as they
called it; for they said, "We may as well hear as much as we can, as our
father and uncle and aunts did when they were children." They would shut
their eyes for some minutes, and then they would tell each other what
they had heard. I can tell you their ears grew very sharp with all this
practice; for, like other children, they had their quiet moods, when
under the lofty forest trees or in the garden nooks they would listen,
not for fun but for enjoyment.




III.

_TOM'S BIRDS' EGGS._

"The goldfinch, and blackbird, and thrush,
  Are brimful of music and glee;
They have each got a nest in some bush,
  And the rook has built his on a tree."

BERNARD BARTON.


About a mile off, at the other end of the wood, was a village, which
joined an old town so closely that they seemed to be only one place.

The old town was quiet now; but it had been a very busy place many years
ago, in the old coach days. I cannot tell you how many coaches daily ran
through it, or changed horses at the different inns, on their way from
London to towns in distant parts of England.

Now the railway had stopped every coach, and in the valley, through
these very woods, the trains rushed along, panting and puffing as if
they were running a race with Time.

Fortunately, the trains ran through a tunnel at this spot, so the beauty
of the woods was not disturbed.

There was a large green belonging to the village, on the edge of which
lived the children's aunt Lizzie, who had married a doctor. She had two
children--Tom, who was eleven years old, and Katey, who was nine. They
went to school daily in the adjoining town, so they were unable to see
much of their cousins, excepting upon half-holidays, as it was now
school time.

But you must not suppose that Jack and his sisters did nothing but play
during this long visit. As soon as they had settled down, grandmamma
engaged a young lady to come to teach them for about two hours every
morning. Woodside was too far from the town for the children to go to
school with their cousins. When they were at home they went to a
kindergarten school, where they learned in the wisest and pleasantest
fashion.

[Illustration: TOM SHOWING THE REDBREAST'S EGGS.
_Page 29._]

The children always looked forward to the half-holidays, when they
either went up to their cousins' home, or Tom and Katey came down to
them.

One Saturday afternoon, when they went to the green, Tom showed them his
collection of birds' eggs. He kept them in shallow boxes full of bran,
so that they should not get broken, for he was very careful over them.

Tom's mother told him never to take more than one egg from each nest,
unless there were a great many, as there are in wrens' nests, so that
the mother bird might not grieve.

"Please show us a robin redbreast's egg," said little Annie.

Tom took two or three from under the bran, and showed her the eggs,
which were yellowish-gray mottled with red-brown.

"Mrs. Redbreast has not nearly so red a breast as Robin," he said.

"I suppose you have plenty of sparrows' eggs," said Mary, "they are such
common birds."

"Yes; here they are. They are rather large for the size of the bird;
they are spotted and streaked all over with gray and brown."

"What a lovely pale greenish-blue egg that is!" exclaimed Mary.

"Yes, that it is," said Tom; "and it belongs to a dear little brown
bird--the hedge-sparrow. It is not at all the same kind of bird as the
house-sparrow, for it is one of the warblers. It is a prettier bird, and
has prettier eggs than the common sparrow. He builds his nest very
early, before the hedges are covered with leaves; so his nest often gets
stolen. He is one of the birds that stay in England all through the
winter.--These speckled eggs of a bluish-gray belong to the linnet,
which has a very sweet song, although not very powerful.--These belong
to the chaffinch; they, you see, are greenish-purple spotted with
brown. See here! I have a nest made by this bird."

"It is perfectly lovely," said Mary.

"It is, indeed; it is one of the most beautiful of all the birds'
nests--such a nice round shape, and so firm that it does not easily fall
to pieces. Inside it is lined with hair and feathers, and downy things,
which make it ever so soft. Just put your finger inside, Annie, and feel
it. Outside it is made of moss, fine dry grass, and wool, all matted
together, and covered all over with the lichen which grows on the trunks
and branches of trees. It is often very difficult to find this bird's
nest, it looks so exactly like the part of a tree."

"Have you a blackbird's egg?" asked Jack. "I know his note, for it is
clear and louder than that of most of the other birds."

"Yes, here are some. You see they are of a bluish-green colour, with
dark blotches; and very pretty they are too.--Those blue eggs with a few
black spots on them belong to the thrush. You must have heard the
thrushes singing about grandpa's garden; there are plenty of them
there."

"I'm afraid you haven't a cuckoo's egg, Tom," said Annie.

"I am so lucky as to have one, Annie. It is very small for the size of
the bird, and not particularly pretty. You see it is a dull-looking egg,
whitish, with pale-brown markings. This particular egg was taken from
the nest of a hedge-sparrow; but cuckoos' eggs have been found in the
nests of many other birds--robin's, and skylark's, and chaffinch's,
linnet's, blackbird's, and wren's, and many more besides."

"Why does not the cuckoo build a nest for herself?" asked Annie.

"Nobody seems to know why she doesn't; but there's the fact. When the
cuckoo has laid an egg, she carries it in her wide, gaping mouth, and
puts it into the nest of another bird that she has chosen for it. When
the egg is hatched, the young cuckoo grows so fast that he wants all the
nest to himself. He turns the other young birds that have been hatched
with him out of the nest, and the true parents of these little birds
have to spend all their time in feeding the cuckoo. It takes a great
deal to feed him, because he grows so fast, and is so much larger than
they are. They don't seem to mind it though.--Those pale-green eggs with
dark-brown spots belonged to a rook's nest in the elm-tree at the bottom
of the garden. There's a curious story about those rooks down there, for
they have not been there long. There is an old rookery belonging to the
Rectory close by our house; and one day the rooks from there came to our
elm-tree. It was in the spring. At last they came frequently, and
chattered, and cawed, and flew round and round, as if they did not know
what to do about building their nests in it. By-and-by their visits
ceased, and they built their nests as usual in the Rectory trees. That
very summer, during one still night, a large branch, almost a third of
the elm-tree, fell to the ground. The rooks seemed to know that the
tree was not safe, and so they would not build in it. That was two years
ago; and this spring they have begun to build, and there are several
nests now in our elm-tree. It is most interesting to watch the ways of
rooks; they seem to have a lot of business on hand. There is another
rookery in the town, in the garden of Mrs. Cross, a friend of my
mother's. Rooks always leave the town rookeries for the country as soon
as their young ones are able to fly. Now Mrs. Cross noticed that her
rooks, after they had gone to the fields, always came back each morning
quite early to look after their nests. They stayed a little while to
talk over matters; then they flew back again to the fields. One very
stormy morning she noticed that instead of the whole flock coming and
alighting, one solitary rook ventured through the wind and rain, flying
round and round the trees without settling, and then flew back again to
the others to give his report that all was right in the old home."

"What clever birds they must be!" said Mary.

"They are," said Tom. "There are lots of stories about rooks, but what I
have told you happened under our very eyes.--I have a sparrow-hawk's egg
here, white, spotted with brown. It was given to my father by a man for
me. There are not many of these birds about here."

"Oh," said Jack, "I wish I could get a collection of birds' eggs!"

"It is almost too late in the season now," said Tom. "Still, you might
get some from late nests. I can spare you some from mine, to make a
beginning. I know a young fellow, who lives about a half-mile off, who
has a large collection of eggs. We'll go and see him one Saturday
afternoon. He is sure to have some to give away, for he is always adding
to his store, and he is very good-natured."




IV.

_JACK AND THE GARDENER._

"Oh! fie upon you, little birds,
  To eat up _all_ our cherries!
Why don't you go into the woods
  And dine upon the berries?"--C. H.


A few days after Tom had shown his cousins his collection of birds'
eggs, Jack, as he was coming away from a visit to Lion, passed by the
end of the potting-shed. The gardener was in there, and he called out,
"Master Jack, I've got something for you in here."

Jack went into the shed, and the gardener fumbled about on a shelf till
he found what he was looking for.

"There," he said, "is a thrush's nest; I thought you'd like it. I took
it out of one of the trees in the orchard. It has got four pretty eggs
in it."

[Illustration: JACK AND THE THRUSH'S NEST.
_Page 36._]

"Oh," said Jack, "how splendid! What a treasure! It does seem a shame,
though, to take it from the birds."

His delight soon got the better of his scruples, especially when he
heard the gardener say,--

"There are too many birds about here already. Missus does encourage them
so, that they are as bold as possible. I can tell you, Master Jack, who
gets most of the cherries. It is not us that does; it's them birds,
especially the thrushes and blackbirds. I'm up early, and I see; and I
hear 'em too before I'm up. There they are, at the fruit as soon as 'tis
light. They have their breakfasts hours before you get yours. One
wouldn't grudge them a few cherries now and again; but to clear the
trees as they do is downright greediness, I say. And I wouldn't be hard
on them for taking a few currants, for we have plenty of them; but they
just go and strip off the largest and reddest of them, and leave the
stalk hanging, and that's all that's left of a fine bunch. Then as to
the pease--you like pease, don't you, Master Jack? your grandpa's
uncommon fond of 'em--well, I have to sow the pease pretty thick, or,
I'll warrant ye, we shouldn't have a tidy row come up at all. I have to
dodge about with netting and scarecrows to keep what we do get; for I
hate a patchy row, I do. Last winter was a very cold season. I don't
know how you found it in London, Master Jack, but here there was a long
hard frost for three weeks. We'd had a good deal of rain; then it turned
to snow, and froze and snowed again till the snow lay pretty thick all
over the ground. Then it cleared up, and the sun shone; but the sun
hasn't much power at that time of the year, so it did not melt the snow.
It was bitter cold by day, and worse at night. The birds that eat grubs
and insects could not get any food at all. So your grandma had a big
lump of fat put into a piece of coarse netting, and it was hung up in a
likely place--the long branch of a tree--where the birds could get well
at it. You should have seen the poor creatures pecking away! It was soon
gone, and we had to put more lumps into the net before the frost went. I
thought to myself it was almost a pity to try to save their lives; it
was just a natural way of getting rid of a lot of them. They do say that
dying by cold is an easy way--it's like going to sleep; so I'm not
wishing any great harm to the little things. And now, Master Jack, how
do you think these birds paid back your grandma for all her kindness?
Why, as soon as ever the frost was gone, and the weather became warmer,
and the yellow crocuses came into bloom, if these very birds, or some of
them at least, did not slit the flowers all to pieces with their
bills--that's what _they_ did. The ground was covered with bits of
flowers.--Do you know Mrs. Jones who lives on the green, Master Jack?"

"No," he said; "I don't."

"Well, she's a great friend of your grandma's; but she is not
over-strong, and doesn't get out in the winter. She likes to have the
birds about her, and she fed them on her lawn with crumbs and pieces;
and her fine bed of crocuses in front of her windows was just spoiled.
It was mostly the yellow ones that they tore to shreds; and the
primroses too--there was hardly one fit to pick. The starlings and the
sparrows were the worst; they did a lot of mischief."

"Oh," said Jack, "perhaps they were after insects, or something they
wanted to eat. I don't believe they _meant_ to do any harm."

"Perhaps not," said the gardener; "but the crocuses were spoiled all the
same. You know, Master Jack, I'm about the place summer and winter, and
I see a lot. Now, if there's one thing more than another that I hate
about a garden, it's cats. They do trample down things and spoil the
beds. As this house is lonesome rather, we don't get much of that pest,
I'm glad to say; and then Smut is not a sociable cat. But I'll tell you
of a curious thing that happened to him one day. There was a pair of
thrushes who had built their nest in the laurel hedge at the bottom of
the garden next to the field. You know, Master Jack, there's a broad
gravel path along the garden side of the hedge. One day, just as the
young birds were able to get out of the nest, the young cat at my
cottage close by walked into this garden, where, of course, she'd no
business; but there she was in that gravel path, and she saw one of the
birds and caught it. I saw her with it. The thrushes scolded her, flew
at her with a sharp, angry cry, and puss was soon off the premises. The
next day, Mr. Smut was walking along this gravel path, enjoying the
sunshine in a quiet way, never thinking of birds, for he's a deal too
lazy to put himself out of the way to catch anything. I've tried him
with a mouse, but he never put out a paw to touch it. He blinked at it
in the most unconcerned way, and didn't show the least bit of interest
in it. Well, as I said, Smut was walking along, when out flew the
thrushes from the hedge, swooped down upon him, pounced on his back,
pecked his head, and screeched at him, till poor Smut was quite dazed.
They fairly chased him out of that part of the garden. You would have
laughed to have seen sober old Smut take to his legs as fast as he could
run. The robins, too, soon afterwards began the same game, and would
stand and scold within two or three yards of the cat, if he was asleep
in the garden. I have often seen them sit just over him, and scold him
till he woke up and came indoors. As to the gravel path by the thrushes'
nest, Smut never came into that path again all the summer through.
Smut's a deal too particular," added the gardener; "but I have heard of
another cat that was almost as bad. The house-maid told me that in one
of her places there was a fine tabby cat, or rather a good-sized kitten,
which would never eat anything in the kitchen, and was so particular in
his ways that he was called 'Sir Thomas.' At dinner time he had a trick
of jumping up as quick as lightning just when any one was going to put
his food into his mouth with his fork. He would give the fork a knock
with his paw, so that the meat tumbled off; which he ate before one
could see what had happened! Such behaviour was not to be borne; so Sir
Thomas was always turned out of the room at dinner time. He was a good
mouser, and foraged well for himself out of doors. One day he ate some
poisoned meat, at least it was supposed he did so. He became so thin,
and his fur came off; so he had to be killed, and that was the end of
Sir Thomas."

"I hope poor Smut won't come to any harm," said Jack. "I should have
liked to see the birds chasing him, though. I wonder the thrush wasn't
afraid of getting on to a cat's back."

"Why, the bird was safe enough; Smut couldn't reach it, and he was
almost frightened out of his senses. You know animals, when they have
their young to take care of or their lives to defend, can do things
which seem contrary to their nature. Birds don't make their perches on
cats' backs, except for very good reasons.

"I heard of a dreadful thing that happened once," said the gardener,
lowering his tone. "There was a cat--it was a half-wild one--and some
boys had a dog that was very fond of worrying cats. They set this dog on
to the poor cat, expecting to see a fight. But puss made a clean jump on
to the dog's back, and fixed herself there. Lifting up first one front
paw, then the other, she beat and scratched the dog's head terribly. The
boys then wanted to get the dog away, but they durst not touch either of
them--the cat would have flown at them; besides, they were cowards, as
cruel people always are. Then a gentleman came up, and he got a
pitchfork, and secured the poor beasts, and they were both killed. At
least the dog was, for certain. Now that's a fact," said the gardener.

[Illustration: REYNARD HARD PUSHED.
_Page 45._]

"I can tell you another curious thing," added he; "it's about a fox this
time. It didn't happen anywhere about here, but in a part of the
country where there's a deal of hunting going on. This poor fox was
being hunted, and away he went through woods, over ploughed land and
meadows, the pack of hounds and the huntsmen in full cry after him, when
they came to a small village. Up the street ran the fox, the dogs at his
heels, when he saw the open door of a house and ran inside, up the
stairs, and crouched under a cot where a little child lay fast asleep!
The mistress of the house saw the fox rush in, and she instantly shut
the front door, as she knew she would have the whole pack of hounds in
her house. As it was, two dogs, a little in front of the others, rushed
past her through the hall into the kitchen, then into the yard; so they
at once shut the kitchen door, and the dogs just missed the fox. There
was a sight all round the house; the dogs were just mad to get in, and
trampled down the flower-beds--for there was no keeping them out of the
front garden--making such a yelling and barking as you never heard. At
last one of the huntsmen came into the house, caught the fox, and
carried him away in a bag. The next day a gentleman sent his gardener to
put the garden straight again, after the dogs; but the crocuses, which
were just showing nicely for bloom, were quite spoiled. They sent the
fox's brush--that's his tail, you know--to the mistress. I've been
inside this very house, and seen where the fox went to hide himself.
It's not the way of the creatures that live in the woods to come into
houses, but the poor fox was hard drove; he was.

"But now, Master Jack, I've finished my job in this shed, and I must
go."




V.

_HIVING THE BEES._

"Busy bee, busy bee, where do you go?"--
"To meadows and gardens whose sweets I know;
Filling my baskets with spoils from the flowers,
Working hard for the hive in sunny hours."--C. H.


In a sunny corner of the kitchen garden stood a row of bee-hives. Many a
time did the children stand to watch the busy workers, flying out of the
hive to gather honey from the flowers, either to feed the bees or to
store it into cells for future use.

They would watch them returning laden, not only with honey, but with
pollen, the yellow dust found in the inside of flowers.

Bees get covered with this powder while they are sucking the honey out
of the flowers; and they carefully brush it off their bodies with their
hairy legs, make it into lumps, and then place it in a curious kind of
basket or pocket which every bee has in the middle of each of its hind
legs. The children often saw the bees with these yellow lumps piled up
so high that it seemed a wonder they did not fall off. And so they might
have done, had it not been for the fringe of long hairs at the edge of
the basket, which, by making a kind of lid, kept the precious load safe.
They watched the bees fly into the hive, but they could not see what
happened next and what became of their treasure.

Shall I tell you?

First of all, other bees come to help them to unload; then those that
are hungry eat the honey; and what is not wanted is stored away in the
cells which those that stay at home are making.

But how do they get the wax for their cells? It does not grow in
flowers.

No; they make it out of honey which they retain instead of storing. It
comes while the bees are quiet; and many bees hang together for a long
time while the wax is forming. It then oozes out in thin flakes on their
bodies; and this they knead till it is soft enough to build with.

They bring home from the fields something besides pollen and honey; it
is a gummy substance which they get from the buds of trees. They use it
with the wax, partly as a varnish and partly to make it stronger. They
mend up broken places with it, and it answers the purpose of cement.

They use their cells for three things: to store honey, to store bee
bread, and others are used to rear the young bees,--nurseries, in fact.

Bees have a great deal to do besides getting honey and building their
cells. They have their young ones to take care of. As soon as an egg is
hatched they feed the grub with great care; and in about ten days it
wants no more food, but spins a kind of web round itself, and lies quite
still for about ten days more, when it comes out a bee, ready for work.

Only one bee lays eggs. She is the queen and the mother of all the
others. She is a good deal larger than they are, and they all obey her.

One day about the end of May, just as the children's lessons for the
morning were over, they heard the gardener come into the hall to tell
their grandpapa that one of the hives had swarmed.

"Oh! what is that?" they cried. "Do tell us; do let us go and see."

"Wait a little, wait a little," said grandpapa. "It means that the hive
won't hold all the bees any longer; there are too many of them in it,
and the old queen bee has left it, with some thousands of her subjects,
to a young queen that will now reign in her stead."

"We must see about a new hive for her, gardener."

"Yes, sir; we have it all ready. Bob is waiting with it in the garden
now."

Bob was the young man who milked the cow, and minded the pony and the
pigs and fowls.

"Oh, do let us go too," cried all the children.

"I must hear what grandmamma says," said grandpapa. "It won't do for any
of you to get stung, you know."

Just then grandmamma came into the hall to see what all the commotion
was about.

The three children turned to her and said, "Do let us go to see the bees
put into their new hive."

"Where have they swarmed?" asked grandmamma.

"On to a plum-tree, ma'am, quite close to the hives," said the
gardener.--"I don't think the little ones will come to any harm if you
will let them go," he added, when he saw their eager looks.

"Well," said grandmamma, "there really is no danger, if you will all
keep perfectly still. It is easy to hive them from a branch, but needs
a great deal more care if they swarm upon the ground. If any bees should
settle on you, you must let them stay till they fly off of their own
accord. If you try to brush them off, they will be nearly sure to sting
you."

"I am almost afraid to let little Annie go, lest she should be
frightened."

"I will take care of Annie," said grandpapa.--"You won't be afraid in my
arms, will you, my little pet, even if some bees do settle on you? Yes,
yes, you shall come," he said; for he could not bear to have her
disappointed.

"If they cover me," said Jack, "I won't touch one of them!"

So all but grandmamma started off for the garden; and sure enough there
was hanging from one of the lower branches of the plum-tree a huge bunch
of bees; it was wonderful how they managed to keep together.

"They'll hive easy," said the gardener.

Bob held the new hive directly under the cluster of bees, and the
gardener gently shook the bough on which it was hanging, when the bees
fell into it. Numbers, however, flew about hither and thither in a state
of great commotion.

"Don't be frightened, Annie dear," said grandpapa; "they won't hurt
you--keep quite still."

A few bees settled on Jack and Mary, many more on the gardener and Bob,
but only two or three on grandpapa and Annie, for he was a little
farther off than the others.

By-and-by all the bees flew away into the hive after their queen, and no
one was stung. The hive was then placed upon a board on the ground and
left there.

In the evening, when all was quiet, the gardener took up the hive and
set it by the side of the other bees.

After the children had gone back to the house, Mary asked grandmamma why
she did not come to see the bees hived.

"My dear, it is no new sight to me. Why, I hived the very first swarm we
ever had myself."

"_You_ hived them, grandmamma? Do tell us about it."

"It was a year or two after we were married, and a friend had given us a
hive of bees in the spring. They swarmed one sunny day when your
grandpapa had gone to London, and the only man handy was the gardener.
He had not been with us long, and he stayed but a very short time, as he
did not suit us.

"I saw the swarm myself hanging on to a red-currant bush, and I asked
the gardener if he could hive the swarm. He said he didn't know anything
about bees, and he didn't care to meddle with them.

"I didn't care to ask for any help from him, so I went into the kitchen
and said to one of the servants, 'Ann, would you be afraid to help me
hive the bees, for they have swarmed?'

"'Not at all, ma'am,' she said.

"So I told her to draw a pair of stockings over her hands and arms, and
to tie a thin shawl over her head and neck; then, when she was ready, we
went into the garden."

"What did you put on, grandma?"

"Nothing special. I was vexed at the gardener's cowardice, and I really
did not feel afraid, so I went just as I was. I well remember the dress:
it was muslin, with large open sleeves, so that my arms were bare. I did
not even wear a hat!

"Ann held the hive, and I shook the bees into it. We were both of us
covered with bees that settled on us, as they did on the gardener and
Bob this morning. We let them take their own time to fly off from us,
and neither of us was stung.

"Bees are very curious creatures; they seem to have their likes and
dislikes as well as other beings.

"My grandfather kept bees; but he was obliged to get rid of them, for
they would sting my grandmother whenever she went into the part of the
garden where they were kept. No one ever knew the reason of this."

Bees keep the inside of their hives very clean. If a bee dies, they turn
it out; or if anything like a snail, for instance, crawled in, which
would be too large for them to push out, they would completely cover it
over with wax.

Here grandpapa came into the room and said, "That was a strong swarm of
bees that we have just hived; first swarms generally are."

"How many bees do you think there were, grandpapa?" asked Jack.

"I should say about five thousand. A well-stocked hive will hold from
fifteen to twenty thousand bees. We may expect another swarm from that
same hive in a week or ten days; but it won't be worth so much as this
one."

"Did you ever hear the old rhyme, children?

"A swarm of bees in May
Is worth a load of hay;
A swarm of bees in June
Is worth a silver spoon;
But a swarm in July
Is not worth a fly."

"Why not?" asked Annie.

"Because it is smaller and weaker, and it is later in the year, so they
have not such a long time to get honey to keep them through the winter.
They will generally die off, if they are not fed."

"Suppose the queen dies, what do the bees do then, grandpapa?"

"They are greatly concerned; they run about the hive touching every bee
they meet with their little horns or feelers. Then, when all the bees
know of their loss, they set to work to feed one of the grubs in the
royal cells with a particular kind of food, and a young queen after due
time makes her appearance. They take great care of her, and obey her as
they did the old queen."




VI.

_WASPS AND THEIR WAYS._

"An elegant shape is yours, Sir Wasp,
  And delicate is your wing;
Your armour is brave, in black and gold;
  But we do not like your sting."--C. H.


The next morning Jack went to see how the new hive had settled, and he
found everything going on as usual. The bees were very busy, flying in
and out, and working hard to build the cells of their new home.

The gardener was working near, and he said, "Master Jack, did you ever
see a wasp's nest?"

Jack shook his head.

"Well, now, if you come into my cottage, I'll show you one this evening.
It's not a very good one, for it got broken digging it out of the ground
in one of the garden paths. We'd been terribly plagued with wasps for
weeks, and it was some time before we could find the nest. We watched
them go into a hole in the ground; so one evening when they'd all gone
to bed we got some pitch and brimstone, and laid them with some lighted
sticks on the top of the hole. The wasps woke up, and came out to see
what was going on; but they were smothered by the brimstone smoke, and
were soon done for. The next day we dug out the nest.

"Wasps are great pests, Master Jack, I can tell you. They are very fond
of honey, and they go into the bee-hives to steal it, especially when
the mornings and evenings get cool, and the bees are not watching at the
holes of their hives, because they've gone inside to keep themselves
warm.

"The wasps spoil a lot of fruit. If there's one peach finer than
another, they know it; and as for the plums, green-gages in particular,
why, they are as mad after them as the birds are for the cherries. What
with the caterpillars and slugs being after the vegetables, and the
birds and the wasps making such havoc with the fruit, I wonder sometimes
how we ever get any for ourselves."

"There always seems plenty of fruit and vegetables, though," said Jack.

"Well, yes," said the gardener, "maybe. The birds do help us with
caterpillars and slugs, I'm bound to own; and then we are always on the
look-out to destroy wasps: and as to the birds, I dodge them with
netting; and sometimes we take the nests out of the fruit-trees, as much
as to tell them to go elsewhere."

That evening Jack went into the gardener's cottage and saw the wasp's
nest. It looked like the cells of bees made in whity-brown paper.

"What is it made of?" asked Jack; "it isn't wax."

"Well, I've heard that the wasp, which has very strong jaws, bites bits
of wood off posts and rails, and moistens them by chewing them into a
kind of paper, and then makes a comb of it like what you see here."

"I wish I had seen this wasp's nest taken."

"No, Master Jack; why, you'd be in bed at that time: besides, I don't
suppose your grandmamma would have let you go, even if you had been
here, for you might have been stung. It's rather a touchy job, is taking
a wasp's nest,--very different from hiving bees; we give them a home,
but we take one from the wasps.

"If the queen bee falls into the new hive, the bees are right
enough--they are sure to go where she is; but the wasps are naturally
angered and frightened at being suffocated out of their home. So, I say,
keep clear of wasps' nests; those jobs are best done on the quiet."

"Was anybody stung when this nest was taken?"

"Yes, your grandma was. She's naturally curious about such things, and
came with your grandpa to see the sight. One half-stupified wasp
settled on her hair, and she didn't know it; but after she got back to
the house it revived a bit and moved, and she, not knowing what it was,
touched it, and it stung her badly on the top of her head. I don't think
wasps will sting unless they are touched; but they are such creepy
things that you don't always know where they are, and you are apt to
touch them without meaning to do so."

The next morning at breakfast Jack was talking about the wasp's nest
that he had seen on the evening before at the gardener's cottage.
Grandma remarked, "There is a kind of wasp called the mason wasp, which
bores holes several inches deep in sand-banks. The inside of this long
narrow passage is covered with a gummy paste which the wasp makes with
her mouth. Here she lays her eggs, and then brings some green
caterpillars into the holes, ready for the young wasps to eat when they
come out of the egg. Then she closes the holes by a ball of sand, so
that nothing can get in to eat the young grub. Sometimes these wasps
choose a brick wall instead of a sand-bank for their eggs.

"A friend of mine watched one of these wasps in a wall in her garden.
She saw the wasp go into a small round hole in the mortar between the
bricks. After a few minutes she walked out of the hole, turned round,
and went in again backwards. There she stayed, her little horns and
bright eyes being all that could be seen of the wasp. My friend tried to
make the wasp come out of the hole, but nothing could move her; so then
she had to go away, but not before she had put a mark by the spot.

"The next morning she went back to the wall and found the wasp had gone,
and had carefully and cleverly covered up her hole with what looked like
mortar.

"The lady then took a pen-knife and scraped away this door to the hole.
She then put in a fine crochet-hook, and out tumbled no fewer than
fifteen small green living caterpillars. At last, quite at the back of
the hole, she found a small oval thing, something like an ant's egg,
only more transparent. That was the wasp's egg; and the caterpillars
were for its food when it was hatched, which would be in about three
weeks."

"Don't wasps make honey?" asked Annie.

"No; the common wasp feeds her very young grubs upon the sweet juice of
ripe fruit; in fact they like fruit over-ripe, and that is why they
choose plums and pears and peaches that have fallen down to the ground.
It is dangerous to eat any ripe fruit that has fallen, without first
looking to see if there is a wasp inside it.

"But the young wasps soon want green caterpillars and flies to eat, and
many a blue-bottle fly is killed by wasps."

"If wasps don't store up honey for the winter, what do they live upon
when there are no insects about?" asked Mary.

"When the fruit is all gone, and the nights get cold, about the
beginning of October, then some instinct tells them what to do, for only
a few of them live through the winter.

"The wasps cease to bring in any more food for the young. They tear open
the cells and expose the young grubs to the weather, when they die, or
the birds eat them. Generally they pinch them to death, for they will
not let them live to die of starvation; and while they are in this state
they do not feel pain. So what looks like cruelty is really kindness.

"The full-grown wasps soon become sleepy with cold and die off, all but
the few which live to be the mothers of the wasps next year."




VII.

_CHARLEY FOSTER'S PETS._

"Sweet is the love which Nature brings."--WORDSWORTH.


On the following Saturday afternoon the children went to see their
cousins.

As soon as they arrived, Tom said to Jack, "I saw Charley Foster
yesterday, and told him we would go to see him this afternoon. I asked
him that, if he had any birds' eggs to spare, would he give them to you,
that you might take them back with you to London. He said he should be
most happy to do so; and that we had better stop till after tea, and go
home in the cool of the evening. So," continued Tom, "as soon as you're
ready we'll be off."

"I'm ready now," said Jack; so the boys started for Charley Foster's
house, which was about half a mile off, along the upper edge of the
wood, so the walk was a pleasant one.

Presently they saw two men come out of the wood with large,
square-looking packages, covered over with black linen.

"What are those men doing?" asked Jack; "and what have they got in those
packages?"

"They are bird-catchers, and those are the traps and cages for the
birds. It's a downright shame to keep a thing with wings in a cage. I
can't see what pleasure it can be to listen to their song when they are
shut up like that. I like plenty of room myself, and so do birds," said
Tom.

"What birds have those men been catching?"

"Linnets and goldfinches chiefly. They get nightingales, too, out of
these woods: they are very easy birds to trap, as they are not shy; but
it is now rather too late to catch them. The bird-catchers are after
them about the middle of April, when they first come back to England."

"Do nightingales sing only at night, Tom?"

"No; they sing pretty nearly all day long, only you don't notice them
because other birds are singing too. They begin their night song between
ten and eleven o'clock, when other birds are quiet, and that's the time
to hear them if you happen to be awake. There's Charley Foster's house,
that low white house on the left hand side of the road. There's Charley,
too, looking out for us."

Charley was two or three years older than Tom, but having the same
tastes they were often together.

Charley took them at once to his "den," as he called it, a small room at
one end of the straggling house, reached by a long passage.

"Here," said Charley, "I can do what I like, and make my litters without
disturbing anybody."

Not but that the room was orderly, otherwise Charley would never have
been able to find his things when he wanted them.

He told Jack that he had already put up a box of birds' eggs for him,
with a list and description of the eggs in it.

[Illustration: CHARLEY FOSTER'S COLLECTION.
_Page 68._]

"I'm tremendously obliged to you, I'm sure," said Jack.

"Not at all," said Charley; "I like to give to any one who really cares
for such things: besides, I've not been very generous, as I have only
put in those eggs of which I have other specimens. There are some very
good sorts, though, in your box; for, you see, I've been collecting for
some time. Tom, I've got an owl's egg for you, that white one, and two
jay's eggs--dull green, speckled with olive brown. Look here, too! I've
got a jay itself, which a farmer who lives near here shot and gave to
me. I'm going to try and stuff it."

"What pretty blue and black wings it has!" said Jack.

"Yes; it's a handsome but a very thievish bird. It's very clever, too,
in imitating all kinds of sounds that it hears. It will bleat like a
lamb, mew like a cat, neigh like a horse, and imitate the sawing of
wood exactly."

"How are the red starts getting on?" asked Tom.

"All right," said Charley; "the young birds are hatched now."

Charley turned to Jack, and explained that there was a pair of red
starts that had a nest just outside of the window of the room,--"as you
can see."

Jack went to the window and saw in a hole of the low roof a little
bluish-gray bird with a white crown sitting on a nest; and presently her
mate came with his red tail wagging, bringing an insect in his beak.

Now Jack could see several little red starts poking out their heads from
under their mother's wings, all looking as if they wanted to be fed
first.

"This is the third year that these red starts have built their nest in
that hole," said Charley. "Before that, it seemed as if a pair of
sparrows had looked upon the hole as belonging to them, for when the
red starts first came there were a good many fights between them and the
sparrows.

"One day when the hen red start was sitting, two sparrows made a dead
set at her; and although she behaved in a very plucky manner, she was
getting the worst of it. She then uttered a peculiar cry, and her mate
came to her help directly; and between them they drove off the sparrows.

"That seemed to be the final battle, for there were only a few trifling
skirmishes after that, and the red starts have considered that hole
their own private property ever since."

Charley next showed Jack his collection of butterflies, moths, and
beetles; and after the boys had finished looking at these beautiful and
curious creatures, it was time for tea, so they went downstairs.

When they had finished tea, Charley said, "We will go out of doors and
see our old raven, Grip."

There were all sorts of odd places outside of this rambling old house
which Charley said "just suited him."

In a little enclosure by the side of the kitchen garden was Grip's home.
He was kept at night, for safety, in a large wooden cage with open bars,
something like a hen-coop; but in the day he had his liberty--although
he did not wander far away, for he was very tame.

"He knows all the sounds of the poultry-yard," said Charley, "only I
expect he won't show off when we want him to do so. One morning, he had
not been let out of his cage, and he wanted his breakfast. He called
'Cluck, cluck, cluck,' just as a hen calls her chickens. In fact some
chickens really thought it was their mother calling them, and they ran
to Grip! I am sorry to say he helped himself to one of them; the others
were frightened and made their escape. Ever since then Grip has been in
his present quarters; he was too near the poultry-yard before. Many a
time has he cackled like a hen that has laid an egg, so that the maids
have gone out to look for the egg. He will get up into that elm-tree
there and crow so exactly like a cock that he will set off all the cocks
in the poultry-yard; and, in fact, all the cocks in the neighborhood
that are within hearing will start crowing."

"He knows we are talking about him--Don't you, old Grip?"

Grip gave a croak, as much as to say "Yes," and turned his wise-looking
old head, first on one side then on the other, in a very knowing
fashion.

The boys were just going, when there was a long loud crow from Grip,
exactly like a cock's, which made them all turn round.

"Before we had Grip we had a jackdaw," said Charley. "He was a very
clever bird. He used to go round to the kitchen window every day at a
certain hour, for a potato that the cook used to give him. If it was not
ready she would tell him so, and he would go away for a while, but he
always came back for it.

"One evening he was shut out of his roosting-place by accident, so he
went to the glass doors of the dining-room, which lead into the garden,
and tapped on them loudly with his beak till some one went to let him
in. He hopped about the room, and looked as much as to say,--'I want to
be shown to my bedroom.'

"Poor Jacky! he was killed by an accident; and then we had Grip in his
stead.

"You know we have a pair of hedgehogs, Tom," said Charley. "Well,
they've got some young ones; suppose we go and see them."

The boys went into the kitchen garden, and in a thick hedge at the
bottom they came to the nest which the hedgehogs had made on the ground.
It had a sort of roof to keep the rain off, and inside it was lined with
moss and leaves.

"I never saw a hedgehog," said Jack.

"Well, now, that is one there," said Tom.

Jack saw a little creature rather more than nine inches long, with a
thick body, a long snout, short legs, and no tail to speak of. It was
covered with spines, and could make itself into a ball whenever it
pleased or when it was frightened, and then no dog or beast could touch
the little spiky ball.

"The mother is inside the nest with her young ones," said Charley. "They
are about a fortnight old. These hedgehogs are very tame and know me
well. I'll try to get her to come out of the nest."

Charley went to the cabbage bed and found some slugs, which he put on to
a leaf, and called to the hedgehog. She soon made her appearance, and
the little ones with her, so the boys had a good look at the funny
little things.

"I say, Charley, you won't want six hedgehogs," said Tom. "Can't you
spare me a pair, when these little ones have grown bigger?"

"I daresay I can," said Charley, "I suppose your mother wouldn't mind
having them in the garden: they are apt to make little holes in the
paths, but then they eat slugs and insects. They are quiet, too, in the
day time, but get lively towards evening.

"They are useful little creatures, and soon get tame. I have heard of
their being kept in kitchens to eat up the crickets and beetles there,
sleeping all day and awake at night when these creatures are about. They
eat vegetables and soaked bread, and are easy little things to keep."

"I wish I could see one roll itself into a ball," said Jack.

"Oh, that's soon done," said Charley. He took a stick and gently poked
the hedgehog they saw first. "There, see now! he is bending his head,
and drawing his skin over it like a hood, and closing himself up. See
how stiffly his spikes stick out all over the round ball that he is."

"Well, that is funny," said Jack. "I wonder how he manages to do it?"

"He knows the trick of it," said Tom; "for you can't possibly open him
against his will."

The boys left the hedgehog to uncurl himself when he pleased, and next
went to a cucumber frame where Charley kept a pet toad.

"Don't toads spit poison?" asked Jack.

"No; that's all nonsense. Their skins secrete something unpleasant,
which they can make come out of it when they are frightened or in
danger. Dogs don't like catching hold of a toad with their mouths; but
they are perfectly harmless, in fact they are very useful in a garden,
as they eat slugs, beetles, caterpillars, and earwigs. See, this one
will eat out of my hand; but I must find something for him first."

Charley soon found a fat little slug, which he brought to the toad; and
he at once ate it from his hand.

"I'll find you something else, old boy;" and Charley soon found a fly,
which was snapped up by the toad in a twinkling.

"What beautiful bright eyes he has!" said Jack.

"Yes; and he makes good use of them, too. Didn't you notice how quickly
he darted out his tongue after the fly?--I say, Mr. Toad, I believe you
are growing out of your skin."

"What do you mean, Charley?"

"Don't you see he has grown so much lately that his skin is very tight,
and it is looking dull. He'll soon cast it off. It will split down his
back, and then he will draw his legs out of it.--And you'll have a nice
new suit complete, won't you, old Toady?"

"I think frogs are very interesting creatures too," said Tom.

"So they are," said Charley. "I often stand by our pond down there and
watch them. The pond is in a damp part of the garden; just what frogs
like. In the spring there's a lot of that spotted, jelly-looking stuff,
which is the frogs' spawn, or eggs, about the pond.

"By-and-by, in about a month or so, a tadpole comes out of the egg.
There are swarms of them wriggling about the water, with heads and
bodies and tails, but no legs. In about six weeks more the legs begin to
grow, and gradually the tadpole changes into a frog. See what a number
of young frogs there are hopping about here on the edge of the pond!
They are just out of their tadpole stage. They'll eat just what toads
eat, so they do no harm in a garden."

"I think I'll take some home with me and put them into the little pond
in grandpapa's garden," said Jack; "for I shall like to watch them
growing."

So Jack caught a few carefully, and tied them loosely in his pocket
handkerchief.

"Well," said Tom, "I think we must say good-bye, Charley; it's about
time for us to go home."

"We must not forget the box of birds' eggs; and thank you," said Jack.

"No," said Charley; "I'll fetch the box and go home part of the way with
you. It's a very fine evening for a walk."




VIII.

_A TALK WITH AUNT LIZZIE._

"I can show you the spot where the hyacinth wild
  Hangs out her bell blossoms of blue,
And tell where the celandine's bright-eyed child
  Fills her chalice with honey-dew,--
The purple-dyed violet, the hawthorn and sloe,
  The creepers that trail in the lane,
The dragon, the daisy, and clover-rose, too,
  And buttercups gilding the plain."

EDWARD CAPERN.


After the boys had started for Charley Foster's, the little girls went
upstairs into what was once the nursery, where Tom and Katey kept all
their toys and books and learned their lessons; in fact it was still the
children's room.

Katey showed her cousins her various belongings, and said, "I'm afraid I
have not anything so pretty to show you as Tom's birds' eggs. I thought
I would make a collection of wild flowers and leaves, and press them
and fasten them on to paper. So I began with the leaves of the forest
trees, and here they are."

The children looked through the sheets, on which were pressed the leaves
of the oak, the elm, the birch, the willow, and many others besides, all
so different in shape.

"The _leaves_ are very well," said Katey, "but not the _flowers_. I soon
left off pressing them, for the poor flowers looked so wretched, so
unlike the living ones, that I did not care to go on."

"I have felt just the same about some of the things in the museums in
London," said Mary. "They may interest grown-up people, but not us. They
are so dried and withered, that they don't give you much of an idea of
what they were in life. Who would ever guess what a man was like by
seeing a mummy? and some of the things are no better than mummies."

"I am very fond of flowers," said Katey: "they look lovely in their own
places where they grow, but just like mummies, as you say, dried up and
stuck upon paper."

"I'll tell you what: we are going to have tea on the lawn, and after tea
we'll ask mother to show us some sketches she has made of wild flowers.
Now they do give you a real notion of the flowers themselves."

Katey went to the window, and said, "Oh! there is Sarah bringing out the
table for tea already. Let us go downstairs into the garden."

So they all went down to watch Sarah lay the cloth, and put the bread
and butter and cake on the table, then the milk and sugar, and last of
all she brought the teapot.

"Here comes Aunt Lizzie," said Annie; and all the children joined in the
request that when tea was over she would show them her paintings of
flowers.

"To be sure I will," she said; "and we will look at them out of doors as
soon as the tea-table is cleared."

"I _do_ like having tea out of doors," said Annie; "we can never have
it in London, however hot it is."

[Illustration: THE TEA ON THE LAWN.
_Page 82._]

"We cannot have it for very long in the country either," said Aunt
Lizzie, "because our weather is so changeable. Sometimes we have cold
winds with bright sunshine, or it rains, or the grass is damp. Still,
during the long summer days we can frequently manage it; but it is not
always summer even in the country."

"Do the woods seem very dreary to you in the winter, aunt?"

"No; I have known and loved them all my life, and they have a very
different look in winter from what they have in summer."

"But they look so bare when the leaves are gone," said Annie.

"Yes; but you can see the shapes of the trunks and branches, down to the
little twigs. You can tell the name of the tree from its skeleton, for
each has its own form--the sturdy oak, the stiff poplar, the drooping
willow, and the elegant silver birch. You should see them after a fall
of snow. Each tree bears the weight of snow after a different
fashion--like itself.

"In fact the woods during a bright hard frost are as good as Fairyland.
The brown dead oak leaves lying on the ground are fringed all round the
edges with what looks like small diamonds sparkling in the sun. The
frost takes every blade of grass, every twig and straw, and covers them
with glittering crystal, and the whole air is clear and bright."

"We have some very beautiful days in winter," said Katey.

"Yes," said her mother; "calm, still, cloudless days--like midsummer,
only of course colder. Not very often, it is true, but occasionally.

"I was walking on one such day till I came to what had been the private
road leading to a gentleman's house. The house itself was old and
uninhabited, and the way to it was open. I walked along, and the trees
on either side of it were bare, sparkling with frost and looking like
other trees outside. Presently I came to a bend in the road, and saw
that on both sides the space was planted with evergreen shrubs and
trees, and some of the trees were very tall. There were evergreen oaks,
and pines, and firs, and plenty of the large-leaved ivy. It seemed as if
I had walked from midwinter into midsummer. The bright sun was shining,
the air was still, the sky a cloudless blue, and all the trees were
green! I stood still to enjoy the sight, then I walked on for a very
short way, when another sharp turn of the road brought me back to the
wintry landscape of bare trees and more open country. That sight can be
seen any winter now."

"I thought the country was dull in winter," said Mary.

"We have dull days, rainy days, and dark days; but then, although Nature
is so quiet, she is still alive, and there are always changes going on.

"I knew a gentleman, who is dead now, but he lived to be very old. For a
very great many years he always took one walk, at a certain hour every
Sunday morning, all the year through. It was a very ordinary country
walk--through the little town, up by the side of a fir plantation, along
hedge-rows and scattered houses, over a stile into a long ploughed field
generally planted with turnips for cattle, then over another stile,
through winding lanes that led to farm-houses and at last came out into
the public road.

"It interested him to watch the changes week after week--the first
appearing of buds in the spring time, their growth during the week, then
the bursting of the leaves. Then there was the white blossom of the
black-thorn, which comes before the leaves; then that of the white-thorn
or 'May;' the silvery blossom of the willow tree; and the yellow catkins
of the hazel, called by country children 'lamb-tails.' Then came the
wild flowers of very early spring, till, as the weeks went on, their
bloom was over with summer and autumn. Now the hedges were red with hips
and haws. At last the leaves fell, and winter came once more.

"Besides all these changes there were the birds to notice--when they
first came back to England after their winter absence, when the cuckoo
was first heard, and many other things as well.

"You may take the same walk fifty-two times a year, year after year, as
he did, and yet no two walks will be alike.

"Now Sarah shall clear the table and I will fetch my portfolio of
sketches."

When Aunt Lizzie returned she said, "These are all wild flowers
here.--You know that one?"

"Why, yes, it is a primrose. We should know what a primrose was like
better by this than by the dried ones. Why, aunt! you have painted a
whole lot of them growing just as they do grow."

"Yes; I like, if I can, to paint the flowers in their natural places,
besides taking a single flower and painting it the size of life. Look
at that wild rose-bush mixed with bramble in that piece of hedge;
underneath it I have painted a small spray of roses and buds."

"What is that pretty little flower?" asked Annie; "I don't remember ever
having seen one like it."

"It is the wood-sorrel; a very lovely little thing it is too. It is
common in woods and shady places; but the flowers are almost over now."

"We have some roots of it in the shrubbery, and I saw one flower in
bloom there this morning," said Katey.

"Well, you may all go and look at it, if you like." So the children
scampered away to look at the small pale, drooping flower.

"What pretty leaves it has!" said Mary. "I have brought one with me; it
looks like a cluster of leaves in one."

"Yes; the bright, transparent leaves and stems are very delicate. These
leaves will frequently fold up, if knocked, like the leaves of a
sensitive plant. You can look for a plant in the woods and try it. The
leaves, too, have a very acid taste."

"I see a violet root. I like violets because of their sweet smell," said
Annie.

"I like what are called dog-violets too," said her aunt. "They have no
smell at all, but they grow all the summer through, in hedges and in
grass, in such large quantities that the turf often looks like an
embroidered carpet.

"The flower is very similar to the scented violet, only it is of a pale
grayish blue. I have painted two roots side by side, one of the scented,
one of the dog-violet; also a specimen of the white violet, which is not
so common as that of the dark kind, but its smell is quite as
delicious."

The children were delighted to recognize, among others, sketches of
daisies, cowslips, buttercups, wood-anemones, wild hyacinths,
forget-me-nots, eyebright, red and white clover, and many kinds of
flowering grasses and graceful fern leaves.

"What is that?" they said, as they saw something that looked curious but
not pretty.

"That is one of the sketches I took in Cornwall two or three miles from
the Land's End. It is a poor, unhappy furze-bush, covered with dodder.
The dodder is what is called a parasitical plant; that is, a plant that
lives entirely on another. There are several kinds of dodders: some live
entirely on flax, some on nettles, but those that stick to clover and
furze-bushes are the most common in this country.

"When the seed of a dodder dropped into the ground begins to grow, it
feels about for the kind of plant it wants to live upon: if it cannot
find it, it dies.

"This furze dodder, you see, has found what it wanted, and, having done
so, began at once to coil its pink thread-like stem on that of the
furze. Now it had gained its footing, and threw out a great many more
fine stems in all directions, after the fashion of strawberry runners,
rooting as it grew. There are thousands of little dodder plants sucking
the life out of the furze. I have seen many of the bushes quite
smothered, and even killed, by this unpleasant and greedy plant.

"When you are older, if you study the ways of plants, you will find them
quite as interesting as those of animals. They have to get their living;
and some, like the dodder, prefer to get it at the expense of another;
and others resort to all kinds of plans to keep themselves and their
kinds alive.

"The acid of the pretty wood-sorrel is a poison, so nothing will eat it;
and the buttercups growing in meadows are untouched by cattle, because
of the poison in their leaves and stems.

"I might tell you of many other plants that live in safety because they
are defended by poison, or thorns, or prickles, or some peculiar shape.
The leaves of the common holly are only prickly on the lower branches,
where it needs protection from browsing cattle.

"Then there are wonderful contrivances for keeping not only the single
plant but its kind alive, which you will learn one day.

"There are plants which bear seeds in very great numbers, like the
field-poppy, so that some of them are sure to survive. The winds carry
other seeds to great distances, because they have beautiful feathery
down attached to them, which causes them to be easily blown about--such
as thistle and dandelion seeds.

"Birds, too, are great seed-sowers: they eat the wild fruits which
contain the seed. These fruits are generally red or black, so as to
attract birds to them. Among the red ones are hips, the fruit of the
wild rose; and haws, which contain the seed of the white-thorn. Among
the black are blackberries, the fruit of the bramble; and sloes, which
are like a very small hard plum. The birds eat these, and drop the seed
which is inside of the fruit on to the ground."

Then Sarah came into the room to say that Jane had come from Woodside to
take the children back.

"We must wait for Jack," said Mary.

"Yes," said Aunt Lizzie. "I daresay the boys will be home directly. Why,
here they are.--How hot you look, Jack!"

"It is so warm to night, aunt, and we have walked fast. We've had a
splendid time of it at Charley Foster's, and we stayed till the last
minute, so we hurried home at last." Where-upon Jack drew out his
pocket-handkerchief to wipe his hot face, forgetting all about the
little frogs. The loose knot slipped, and you may guess what happened.
The frogs, delighted to get out of Jack's warm pocket, were soon hopping
about the room.

"What have you there, Jack? what does this mean?" asked Aunt Lizzie. But
she could not help laughing, for she knew what odd things boys will do.

Jack explained to her how he had caught the young frogs to put into the
Woodside pond, that he might watch them there.

"Well, you must catch them again," said his aunt, "and I will give you a
paper bag to carry them in, only you need not suppose that there are no
frogs in grandpapa's pond. Charley's pond is large and shaded, while the
Woodside pond is small and open; and the weather has been very dry
lately, so the frogs have kept in the soft mud at the bottom. You will
see plenty of young frogs after the next shower of rain hopping about
the edges of that pond."




IX.

_AFTER THE RAIN._

"The very earth, the steamy air,
  Are all with fragrance rife;
And grace and beauty everywhere
  Are bursting into life.
Down, down they come, those fruitful stores,
  Those earth-rejoicing drops;
A momentary deluge pours,
  Then thins, decreases, stops."

ANON.


"There seems likely to be a change in the weather," said grandpapa one
morning at breakfast. "The wind has got round to the west, and there are
clouds about."

"I am so glad," said Mary.

"So am I," added Annie. "It has been too hot for the last two or three
weeks."

"We shall all be glad to see a little rain," said grandpapa; "the garden
wants it badly enough, and so do the newly-mown fields."

Grandpapa was right, for sure enough during the day there were many
cooling showers, which made everything out of doors look bright and
fresh.

In the evening grandmamma sat at work in the drawing-room by the open
doors which led straight into the garden, and the children were with
her.

Jack was lying on the floor with his face to the garden, and supposed to
be reading a book; while the little girls were busy with some easy
fancy-work, making something to take home to their mother when they left
Woodside.

Jack seemed to be more interested in something out of doors than he was
in his book. At last he exclaimed, "Grandmamma, do look; isn't that a
beautiful white fleecy cloud?"

"Yes, it is indeed, Jack. Clouds _are_ beautiful and well worth looking
at."

The girls put down their work and went to the doors to look out, or
rather up, at the deep blue sky, covered with patches of downy white.

"That cloud looks as if it were made of snow mountains and caves," said
Mary. "See how it changes its shape: now there is another cloud coming
to it: now they have melted into one."

"The sky is one beautiful thing that you can watch anywhere, in town or
country, in summer or winter," said grandmamma. "It is like a
picture-book that is always open; and the pictures are always changing."

The children stood and watched the clouds as they sailed about like
majestic swans. Some moved faster than others, and came in front of
them. They mingled and they parted, and took all sorts of shapes. The
colour changed from pure white to delicate gray; and again a stormy
cloud appeared, dark with rain that would fall somewhere before long.

"O grandmamma, look!" they all exclaimed, as the evening sun shone from
behind a cloud, gilding its edges with gold.

At last, when they had been for some time feasting their eyes with the
beauty of cloudland, something else struck Jack, and he said, "How
sweet everything smells after the rain!"

"Yes, it does, Jack. The very gravel paths and garden mould smell fresh;
and as to the flowers, they are sweeter than ever."

"I can smell mignonnette," said Mary.

"I can smell the stocks," said Jack.

"And I can smell the honeysuckle," said Annie.

"Do, grandmamma, let us walk round the garden, to smell the flowers,"
said all the children; "the gravel is almost dry."

"Very well, you may go; but don't go on the grass--keep to the path."

Jack was off at a bound, and his sisters were not much behind; and they
visited flower after flower, sniffing their sweet perfumes. The tall
white lilies gave out so strong a scent that, sweet as it was, they did
not care to bend them down to their faces; but the roses, after the
rain, were so delicious that they did not want to let them go. They
found, however, that it was not the large showy roses which had the
sweetest smell.

They went to the arch along which the honeysuckle was growing, and then
they smelled the rich carnations and the fragrant mignonnette.

Grandmamma called to them not to stay out too long; but they said, "May
we pick you a little nosegay first? the flowers are just lovely."

"Very well," grandmamma said; "but don't let it be too large."

It really was difficult to know what to leave out when all was so sweet;
but they thought mignonnette, a half-blown moss rose, some sweet-peas, a
piece of honeysuckle and of white jasmine, some pinks, and a little
stock, could not fail to be agreeable. They thought more of what would
smell sweet than of bright colour; and grandmamma was well pleased with
her nosegay.

"Grandmamma," said Jack, "there is a poor-looking flower like a small
stock in the garden; it smells so sweet."

"It is a stock--the night-flowering stock. The flower is dull-coloured
and insignificant; but it has a powerful odour. You must not suppose
that the sweet scent of flowers is for our pleasure alone. The perfumes
are of great use to the plants themselves, and to the insects that live
on honey."

"Of what use can they be to the plants?" asked Mary.

"The perfume is chiefly due to a kind of oil found in the blossoms of
plants, and sometimes in the leaves as well. Lavender, rosemary, thyme,
and herbs used in cooking, are examples of plants whose leaves as well
as flowers possess this ethereal oil, as it is called. Caterpillars do
not like the taste of these oils, and leave these highly-scented plants
alone. It is, however, generally the flowers only that smell; and now
you can guess why they are protected by their fragrance. What is the
most important part of the flower?"

"Its seed," replied Mary.

"Yes; and as the cattle will not eat the flowers, the seed is safe from
them."

"But they eat flowers in hay," said Jack.

"True; but by the time the grass is cut many seeds have ripened and have
dropped out of their husks; and when flowers are dry, as they are in
hay, they lose their particular scent and the oil with it. But the very
perfume which keeps away the enemies of the flower attracts its friends
the insects, whose sense of smell is very keen."

"Why do flowers want insects?" asked Annie.

"Because they want their yellow dust taken from one flower to another,
to ripen their seeds, or to fertilize them, as it is called. The seeds
are far better if they are ripened by the pollen or dust of another
blossom than by the pollen of their own flower. The bees, as you know,
get covered with this dust as they visit one flower after another; some
of it sticks to the bees, but a great deal of it drops off as they rub
against the flowers."

"It's give and take," said Jack. "The flowers give the honey for the
insects to eat, and the insects carry their pollen away for them."

"Yes, that's something like it," said grandmamma. "And now you can see
why flowers which bloom at night need to have a strong odour. There are
some plants which

    'Keep their odours to themselves all day'

but towards evening they

    'Let the delicious secret out;'

and it is that moths and insects that fly about at night may know
whereabouts the flowers are. The bees are busy in the day-time; but
there are a great many kinds of moths, in fact there are more moths than
there are butterflies, and they only fly about at night, and the honey
of flowers is their sole food. So you see the scent of flowers has a
great use."

"I never thought of that before," said Mary.

"If the flowers which keep open late in the evening have not a very
strong perfume, they are generally white or pale yellow, so as to be
seen easily. There is one of these plants called the evening
primrose--not that it is like a primrose except in colour--at the bottom
of the garden walk."

"Do let us go and see if there is a moth on it, grandmamma."

Grandmamma smiled and said, "Jack might go and look, and then he could
tell his sisters what he saw."

Jack scampered away, and after a minute or two he was back with the
report that he had counted seven winged flies and moths all busy feeding
upon the honey of the different blossoms of the plant!

"Insects can smell things at a far greater distance than we can," said
grandmamma. "The sense of smell seems to be their strongest sense."

"Do you think it is a good thing to be able to smell so very much,
grandmamma?"

"Certainly I do. I know a keen sense of smell is sometimes disagreeable
for its owner; but as a rule, when a smell is unpleasant it is
unwholesome, and the nose is like a sentinel that gives warning of
danger, so that we may either get out of the way or remove the cause.
Some people really seem to have no noses, considering what they will
endure in the way of bad smells, and how careless they are about keeping
windows shut that ought to be opened to let in the fresh air and
sunshine.

"You must remember, children, that your five senses are but doors which
the mind must keep open. It is the mind that perceives. We say, 'I
perceive this apple is sour;' 'I perceive this cloth is rough;' 'I
perceive a smell of roses;' 'I perceive this flower is white;' 'I
perceive the birds are singing.' So the word 'perceive' will do for
tasting, feeling, smelling, seeing, and hearing."




X.

_THE SIX CLOSED DOORS._

"Say what is it, Eyes, ye see?
Shade and sunshine, flower and tree;
Running waters swift and clear,
And the harvests of the year.--
Tell me, Ears, what ye have heard?
Many and many a singing bird;
Winds within the tree-tops going,
Rapid rivers strongly flowing;
Awful thunder, ocean strong,
And the kindly human tongue.--
These and more an entrance find
To the chambers of the mind."

ANON.


The end of the visit had come at last. Tom and Katey were at Woodside
spending the last day with their cousins. It was evening: the long
shadows were falling over the lawn, and the summer air was still.

Grandmamma was sitting under a tree on the lawn knitting, when the
children clustered around with the old request, "Please, grandmamma,
tell us a story."

Grandmamma looked a little gravely upon the dear, eager faces, and
began:--

"A little boy found himself one day, he could not tell how, in a cell,
or rather a small room, which was very comfortable. He could not
remember anything that had happened before he came there, nor did he
feel frightened although he was quite alone.

"For some time he was content to pass the time without taking any
particular notice of anything. At last he saw that there were several
doors--five--in the walls of his room. He noticed that two were high and
wide, the rest seemed smaller; and he thought, 'I will open one of these
first. Doors must be meant to lead somewhere, and I am rather tired of
this little room, although it is comfortable.'

"He opened the door very easily, and he found himself in a large room.
In the middle of it was a table covered with things that seemed good to
eat.

"He did not see any one, but he heard a voice say, 'Come in and
_taste_.'

"So he took up one nice thing after another, according to his will; and
after awhile he heard the voice say, 'This is enough for once; you may
come again.'

"He turned to go back to his room, but the door was gone. The way to his
cell was open, and this beautiful room was added to his smaller one.

"Now he had plenty of amusement. He learned how different were the
tastes of the objects before him;--some sweet, some sour; others were
bitter, or salt, or spicy; some with flavours that cannot be put into
words, they were so delicate and varied. As soon as he had had enough he
could taste no longer; so he always knew when to leave off.

"He was satisfied for a long time with this room, for fresh objects were
daily added. At last he looked longingly at the door by the side of the
opening where the late door was.

"He opened it and walked out, not into a room, but into a lovely
garden. The walls were high, but the garden was very broad and long.

"There were the fruits whose delicious flavour he knew: now he found
that some of them at least had a fragrant _smell_. However, he scarcely
noticed them; for a strange, sweet odour of flowers greeted his
newly-found sense. After awhile he felt almost overpowered by this fresh
pleasure, and turned to go back for awhile into his little room, when he
found that this door had also vanished. He was glad of this, for the
delicate perfume of the garden freely came into his cell.

"What a growing pleasure was this garden! Every flower had its own
special odour--the rich rose, the tall, queenly lily, and the lowly
violet--each in its way the sweetest.

"At first he thought that only the flowers had perfume, but he soon
found this was a mistake. By taking more careful notice he perceived
that leaves as well as flowers were sometimes scented, as in the musk
plant, the geranium, and even those of black-currant bushes.

"As he walked down an avenue of lime trees, he noticed a most delicious
scent, which he found came from the small blossoms of the trees high
above his head. He turned into a shrubbery, and was greeted by the fresh
fragrance of the pine trees, and found that even the resinous buds of
other trees had a pleasant scent. The very earth too, after a shower of
rain, had a refreshing smell.

"By-and-by he looked at the high walls of the garden, for there seemed
to float over them a blended sweetness of something, he knew not what;
but in after days he knew it as that of new-mown hay.

"Again, the wind would bring him a smell of something that certainly did
not belong to flowers or fruit. It seemed to make him strong, and long
to know what was over the wall. It was the sea-breeze that came to him
from the vast ocean, and made him feel that his lovely garden was, after
all, too bounded.

"He turned the handle of another door. It was that of _touch_, and he
found himself in a passage. He walked along a little way, and saw an
open archway on his right, through which he went, and there he was in
the room of taste. He took up a cherry, and it felt smooth; a peach, and
it felt soft and downy; a pine-apple, and it was rough. He looked toward
the archway through which he had come, when, behold! the whole passage
wall had vanished, making the old room larger.

"He went into his garden: the gravel path felt hard and firm, the lawn
felt soft and springy under his tread. He touched a rose-stalk and he
felt its prickles, while the leaves of the flowers were soft. Some
flower-stalks felt sticky, others smooth, and the bark of the oak tree
was rough.

"The bright sunshine felt warm to his cheek, and the marble of the
fountain felt cold.

"There were now two large doors left, and he resolved to open that of
_hearing_.

"All was dark as he stepped into a room or passage, he knew not which.
He walked on a little way, then he stopped, for he faintly heard the
sound of music. The sweet strains grew longer and louder, drawing him
along till he came to a large hall where an organ was being played by a
master. Here he stayed to listen and to wonder, spell-bound by the
strange high music;--now swelling to a triumph, now sinking to a soft
echo; now it told of gladness, and again of sorrow. Then it changed to a
solemn, stately march; then there was a sound of rippling sweetness,
ending in a lullaby so soothing that he fell fast asleep.

"When he awoke he was in his cell; the door was gone and the mystic hall
had vanished. He went into his garden, and heard for the first time the
sweet song of birds, the hum of insects, and the soft sound of flowing
water from the marble fountain. He heard the swaying of the wind among
the leaves and branches of the trees, and the sound of his own footsteps
on the path.

"'Now for the last door,' he said, as he opened it, and was dazzled by a
flood of light which nearly blinded him. _Sight_, which had been before
but faint and dim, now became clear and open. He found himself in his
old room of taste; but instead of the walls were crystal windows, and
his table of fruits and food looked small in the midst of the vast
space. He turned into his garden: what a change was there! He saw that
the roses were a deep, deep red, and pink, and yellow, and white; that
the flowers were of every hue and shade of colour, and the trees of
varying green.

"Now he saw the birds whose sweet songs he had often heard, some in
bright plumage, and others of graver colours.

"He saw the insects flying about with whose soft hum he was familiar;
some too of whose existence he knew nothing before--the noiseless
butterflies of brown and gold, of deep orange or pale yellow, of azure
blue or cream and brown and crimson.

"He saw the darting dragon-fly, shining in black and blue, with gauzy
wings of pearly tints; and other insects brilliant with many colours,
shining or dusky, flitting by or crawling along the ground.

"Tired out at last with all these wonders, he went back to his cell and
slept.

"He awoke thinking, 'There are now no new doors to open;' but when he
turned to the wall on the opposite side, he saw a door that he had not
noticed before.

"He went up to it, but it was bolted and barred from without, and the
key was in the lock on the outside. 'That door is not meant for me to
open,' he said; and he went once more into his garden. The high walls
were gone, the room with the crystal windows had vanished, but the
senses of taste, of smell, of touch, of hearing, and of sight remained.

"He could now go where he liked. He saw the meadows whose sweet smell of
newly-mown grass had delighted him in his garden; and he wandered down
to the shore, where he felt again the strength of the sea-breeze. He
heard with awe the sound of many waters as myriad waves dashed against
the rocky coast--those same waves which farther along, as the shore
became sandy, rippled out in the lowest murmurs. In the caves, too, he
saw new forms of life--the many-coloured sea-anemones, sea-weeds,
shells; and in the sea itself fishes shining like mother-of pearl.

"There were some mountains in the distance, and he went towards them.
While climbing up their sides, the sky, which had been bright blue, now
became overcast. Black, thick clouds quickly gathered, till day seemed
turned into night. Then there shot through the darkness a swift, bright
flash, lighting everything up for a moment, then leaving all darker than
before. He had not recovered from his astonishment when he heard a
sudden crash, as if the mountain were splitting into pieces, followed by
a long deep roll of boundless sound. Again and again he saw the
lightning's flash and heard the thunder's roar. Then the raging ceased,
the blue sky began to re-appear, the sun shone through the rain-drops,
and on the departing clouds he saw an arch of many colours, beautiful in
form and brilliancy--the lovely rainbow. He gazed at it with strange new
feelings till it all melted away.

"At night he always returned to his cell. This night, however, he was so
full of the wondrous scene he had witnessed on the mountain that he
stayed out of doors, walking up and down his familiar garden path with
downcast eyes. He was deep in thought, when at last he raised his eyes,
and instead of a clear sky he saw tiny points of light shining through
the gray twilight. As the darkness deepened he saw myriads and myriads
of these bright points--the stars. He wondered at the mystery.

"He now began to meet with beings like himself, at first one or two,
then many more. He found the difference in human beings was very great
indeed. Some of them kindly came to him, and told him many things about
the world in which he now daily lived. They taught him how to read books
in which was written the wisdom of men who had lived long ago. Here was
a new, wide opening, as he looked back into the past, into the times so
very far away. But the books were not all old; some were written by
living men, into which they had put their choicest thoughts, and they
gave him an insight into the best part of a man--his soul and mind.
Others told him of the wonderful discoveries made by clever men. They
brought him a telescope, to look through to the stars at night; which
stars, they told him, were other worlds, and that this little world
where he lived was but a speck compared with the rest of creation. In
looking through the telescope he saw into great depths--stars beyond
stars, in number far exceeding his powers of thought. They showed him a
microscope; and in looking through it he saw undreamt-of beauty in
familiar flowers and insects, and in all natural objects. They told him
of the useful and beautiful things that men had found under the
ground--coal, metals, and precious stones. Some of these they showed him
when polished;--the diamond, which seemed to have taken the rainbow to
itself and given it back in a flash, now of pure, now of many-coloured
light; the delicate opal, which looked like a rainbow vanishing; the red
ruby, the green emerald, the violet amethyst, the clear crystal, and
many more besides. They showed him lovely forms, that men had sculptured
in white marble; and paintings representing many things--now a stormy
sea with waves lashed into fury against the rocks--again a summer
evening landscape whose calm soothed his spirit. Scenes from the old
books were made to live again; and then, again, were painted familiar
objects. Wherever he looked, he saw more to see; whenever he listened,
he found there was more to hear. What surprised him most of all was,
that there were some men who did not care to find out and learn more
about the wonders in them and around them; and then he noticed that
those who would not use their eyes, and ears, and other senses, became
dim of sight and hard of hearing, gradually shrinking back into the
state they were before they had opened the doors of their cells.

"He thought of the barred door, and sometimes through its chinks he felt
something steal as once the sea-breeze stole over his garden wall. The
thought of that something followed him more and more.

"By this time he knew that all sights were not fair to look upon, nor
all sounds delightful; and whenever he saw and heard the sad and wrong,
he seemed to be most conscious of the something beyond his cell. He felt
that he was in the world not alone to learn its wonders, but also to
teach the ignorant, to help the weak, to be kind, and true, and brave,
and patient to all.

"Knowledge was a good thing, but goodness was better. The longer he
lived, he felt the less he knew; and the reason was, that he saw more
and more clearly the vast extent of creation.

"Then some one came to him and spoke of an old Book which told of the
great Creator of the world, and that all its wonderful beauty was the
work of His hand; that the sorrow and the wrong which he had seen around
him were but for a time, for the Creator was also the Father of the
universe, and had sent His Son into the world as its Saviour, and to die
for its deliverance.

"Afterwards he read in this Book the story of the life and death of this
Son of God, who was also the Son of man; and he learned that a fuller
and truer life lay beyond the things that are now seen. So with reverent
feeling he waited, thinking much of the closed door.

"At last, the bars were undone, the key was turned in the lock, the door
was opened, the walls of his cell fell down, and he stood young and
strong on the outside! Then he saw and heard things I cannot tell you
about, so like the old, and yet so different. But he felt no fear; for
he knew he was under the same wise, kind, righteous laws, under the
Ruler of the universe, and that the kingdoms of the seen and the unseen
are but one."

THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Woodside, by Caroline Hadley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOODSIDE ***

***** This file should be named 18256.txt or 18256.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/5/18256/

Produced by Susan Skinner, Ross Wilburn and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
