Project Gutenberg's The Wit of a Duck and Other Papers, by John Burroughs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Wit of a Duck and Other Papers

Author: John Burroughs

Release Date: January 25, 2007 [EBook #20448]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIT OF A DUCK AND OTHER PAPERS ***




Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Suzan Flanagan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: [Signature: John Burroughs]]




The Riverside Literature Series


       THE WIT OF A DUCK

        AND OTHER PAPERS

              BY

         JOHN BURROUGHS



 The Riverside Press Cambridge
   HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
   BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO




CONTENTS



I. THE WIT OF A DUCK                5

II. AN ASTONISHED PORCUPINE        10

III. HUMAN TRAITS IN THE ANIMALS   14

IV. THE DOWNY WOODPECKER           22

V. A BARN-DOOR OUTLOOK             27

VI. WILD LIFE IN WINTER            47

VII. BIRD LIFE IN WINTER           54

VIII. A BIRDS' FREE LUNCH          63

IX. BIRD-NESTING TIME              70

X. A BREATH OF APRIL               77

XI. THE WOODCOCK'S EVENING HYMN    83

XII. THE COMING OF SUMMER          89




          COPYRIGHT, 1901, BY E. H. HARRIMAN

COPYRIGHT, 1904, 1905, 1908, AND 1913 BY JOHN BURROUGHS

                 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

                 The Riverside Press
              CAMBRIDGE . MASSACHUSETTS
                     U . S . A




JOHN BURROUGHS


John Burroughs was born April 3, 1837, in a little farmhouse
among the Catskill Mountains. He was, like most other country
boys, acquainted with all the hard work of farm life and enjoyed
all the pleasures of the woods and streams. His family was poor,
and he was forced at an early date to earn his own living, which
he did by teaching school. At the age of twenty-five he chanced
to read a volume of Audubon, and this proved the turning-point in
his life, inspiring a new zeal for the study of birds and
enabling him to see with keener eyes not only the birds
themselves, but their nests and surroundings, and to hear with
more discernment the peculiar calls and songs of each.

About the time of the Civil War he accepted a clerkship in the
Treasury Department at Washington, where he remained nine years.
It was here that he wrote his first book, "Wake-Robin," and a
part of the second, "Winter Sunshine." He says: "It enabled me to
live over again the days I had passed with the birds and in the
scenes of my youth. I wrote the book sitting at a desk in front
of an iron wall. I was the keeper of a vault in which many
millions of banknotes were stored. During my long periods of
leisure I took refuge in my pen. How my mind reacted from the
iron wall in front of me, and sought solace in memories of the
birds and of summer fields and woods!" In 1873 he exchanged the
iron wall in front of his desk for a large window overlooking the
Hudson, and the vault for a vineyard. Since then he has lived on
the banks of the Hudson in the midst of the woods and fields
which he most enjoys, adding daily to his fund of information
regarding the ways of nature. His close habit of observation,
coupled with his rare gift of imparting to the reader something
of his own interest and enthusiasm, has enabled him to interpret
nature in a most delightfully fascinating way. He gives the key
to his own success when he says, "If I name every bird I see in
my walk, describe its color and ways, etc., give a lot of facts
or details about the bird, it is doubtful if my reader is
interested. But if I relate the bird in some way to human life,
to my own life,--show what it is to me and what it is in the
landscape and the season,--then do I give my reader a live bird
and not a labeled specimen."

Mr. Burroughs thoroughly enjoys the country life, and in his
strolls through the woods or in the fields he is always ready to
stop and investigate anything new or interesting that he may
chance to see among the birds, or squirrels, or bees, or insects.
His long life of observation and study has developed remarkably
quick eyesight and a keen sense of hearing, which enable him to
detect all the activities of nature and to place a correct
interpretation upon them to an extent that few other naturalists
have realized.

When he writes he is simply living over again the experiences
which have delighted him, and the best explanation of the rare
pleasure that is imparted by his writings to every reader is
given in his own words: "I cannot bring myself to think of my
books as 'works,' because so little 'work' has gone to the making
of them. It has all been play. I have gone a-fishing or camping
or canoeing, and new literary material has been the result....
The writing of the book was only a second and finer enjoyment of
my holiday in the fields or woods; not till the writing did it
really seem to strike in and become part of me"; and so the
reader seems to participate in this "finer enjoyment" of a
holiday in the fields or woods, walking arm-in-arm with the
naturalist, feeling the influence of his poetic temperament,
learning something new at every turn, and sharing the master's
enthusiasm.




I

THE WIT OF A DUCK


The homing instinct in birds and animals is one of their most
remarkable traits: their strong local attachments and their skill
in finding their way back when removed to a distance. It seems
at times as if they possessed some extra sense--the home
sense--which operates unerringly. I saw this illustrated one
spring in the case of a mallard drake.

My son had two ducks, and to mate with them he procured a drake
of a neighbor who lived two miles south of us. He brought the
drake home in a bag. The bird had no opportunity to see the road
along which it was carried, or to get the general direction,
except at the time of starting, when the boy carried him a few
rods openly.

He was placed with the ducks in a spring run, under a tree in a
secluded place on the river slope, about a hundred yards from the
highway. The two ducks treated him very contemptuously. It was
easy to see that the drake was homesick from the first hour, and
he soon left the presence of the scornful ducks.

Then we shut the three in the barn together, and kept them there
a day and a night. Still the friendship did not ripen; the ducks
and the drake separated the moment we let them out. Left to
himself, the drake at once turned his head homeward, and started
up the hill for the highway.

Then we shut the trio up together again for a couple of days, but
with the same results as before. There seemed to be but one
thought in the mind of the drake, and that was home.

Several times we headed him off and brought him back, till
finally on the third or fourth day I said to my son, "If that
drake is really bound to go home, he shall have an opportunity to
make the trial, and I will go with him to see that he has fair
play." We withdrew, and the homesick mallard started up through
the currant patch, then through the vineyard toward the highway
which he had never seen.

When he reached the fence, he followed it south till he came to
the open gate, where he took to the road as confidently as if he
knew for a certainty that it would lead him straight to his mate.
How eagerly he paddled along, glancing right and left, and
increasing his speed at every step! I kept about fifty yards
behind him. Presently he met a dog; he paused and eyed the animal
for a moment, and then turned to the right along a road which
diverged just at that point, and which led to the railroad
station. I followed, thinking the drake would soon lose his
bearings, and get hopelessly confused in the tangle of roads that
converged at the station.

But he seemed to have an exact map of the country in his mind; he
soon left the station road, went around a house, through a
vineyard, till he struck a stone fence that crossed his course at
right angles; this he followed eastward till it was joined by a
barbed wire fence, under which he passed and again entered the
highway he had first taken. Then down the road he paddled with
renewed confidence: under the trees, down a hill, through a
grove, over a bridge, up the hill again toward home.

Presently he found his clue cut in two by the railroad track;
this was something he had never before seen; he paused, glanced
up it, then down it, then at the highway across it, and quickly
concluded this last was his course. On he went again, faster and
faster.

He had now gone half the distance, and was getting tired. A
little pool of water by the roadside caught his eye. Into it he
plunged, bathed, drank, preened his plumage for a few moments,
and then started homeward again. He knew his home was on the
upper side of the road, for he kept his eye bent in that
direction, scanning the fields. Twice he stopped, stretched
himself up, and scanned the landscape intently; then on again. It
seemed as if an invisible cord was attached to him, and he was
being pulled down the road.

Just opposite a farm lane which led up to a group of farm
buildings, and which did indeed look like his home lane, he
paused and seemed to be debating with himself. Two women just
then came along; they lifted and flirted their skirts, for it was
raining, and this disturbed him again and decided him to take to
the farm lane. Up the lane he went, rather doubtingly, I thought.

In a few moments it brought him into a barnyard, where a group
of hens caught his eye. Evidently he was on good terms with hens
at home, for he made up to these eagerly as if to tell them his
troubles; but the hens knew not ducks; they withdrew suspiciously,
then assumed a threatening attitude, till one old "dominic" put up
her feathers and charged upon him viciously.

Again he tried to make up to them, quacking softly, and again he
was repulsed. Then the cattle in the yard spied this strange
creature and came sniffing toward it, full of curiosity.

The drake quickly concluded he had got into the wrong place, and
turned his face southward again. Through the fence he went into a
plowed field. Presently another stone fence crossed his path;
along this he again turned toward the highway. In a few minutes
he found himself in a corner formed by the meeting of two stone
fences. Then he turned appealingly to me, uttering the soft note
of the mallard. To use his wings never seemed to cross his mind.

Well, I am bound to confess that I helped the drake over the
wall, but I sat him down in the road as impartially as I could.
How well his pink feet knew the course! How they flew up the
road! His green head and white throat fairly twinkled under the
long avenue of oaks and chestnuts.

At last we came in sight of the home lane, which led up to the
farmhouse one hundred or more yards from the road. I was curious
to see if he would recognize the place. At the gate leading into
the lane he paused. He had just gone up a lane that looked like
that and had been disappointed. What should he do now? Truth
compels me to say that he overshot the mark: he kept on
hesitatingly along the highway.

It was now nearly night. I felt sure the duck would soon discover
his mistake, but I had not time to watch the experiment further.
I went around the drake and turned him back. As he neared the
lane this time he seemed suddenly to see some familiar landmark,
and he rushed up it at the top of his speed. His joy and
eagerness were almost pathetic.

I followed close. Into the house yard he rushed with uplifted
wings, and fell down almost exhausted by the side of his mate. A
half hour later the two were nipping the grass together in the
pasture, and he, I have no doubt, was eagerly telling her the
story of his adventures.




II

AN ASTONISHED PORCUPINE


One summer, while three young people and I were spending an
afternoon upon a mountaintop, our dogs treed a porcupine. At my
suggestion the young man climbed the tree--not a large one--to
shake the animal down. I wished to see what the dogs would do
with him, and what the "quill-pig" would do with the dogs. As the
climber advanced the rodent went higher, till the limb he clung
to was no larger than one's wrist. This the young man seized and
shook vigorously. I expected to see the slow, stupid porcupine
drop, but he did not. He only tightened his hold. The climber
tightened his hold, too, and shook the harder. Still the bundle
of quills did not come down, and no amount of shaking could bring
it down. Then I handed a long pole up to the climber, and he
tried to punch the animal down. This attack in the rear was
evidently a surprise; it produced an impression different from
that of the shaking. The porcupine struck the pole with his tail,
put up the shield of quills upon his back, and assumed his best
attitude of defense. Still the pole persisted in its persecution,
regardless of the quills; evidently the animal was astonished: he
had never had an experience like this before; he had now met a
foe that despised his terrible quills. Then he began to back
rapidly down the tree in the face of his enemy. The young man's
sweetheart stood below, a highly interested spectator. "Look out,
Sam, he's coming down!" "Be quick, he's gaining on you!" "Hurry,
Sam!" Sam came as fast as he could, but he had to look out for
his footing, and his antagonist did not. Still, he reached the
ground first, and his sweetheart breathed more easily. It looked
as if the porcupine reasoned thus: "My quills are useless against
a foe so far away; I must come to close quarters with him." But,
of course, the stupid creature had no such mental process, and
formed no such purpose. He had found the tree unsafe, and his
instinct now was to get to the ground as quickly as possible and
take refuge among the rocks. As he came down I hit him a slight
blow over the nose with a rotten stick, hoping only to confuse
him a little, but much to my surprise and mortification he
dropped to the ground and rolled down the hill dead, having
succumbed to a blow that a woodchuck or a coon would hardly have
regarded at all. Thus does the easy, passive mode of defense of
the porcupine not only dull his wits, but it makes frail and
brittle the thread of his life. He has had no struggles or
battles to harden and toughen him.

That blunt nose of his is as tender as a baby's, and he is
snuffed out by a blow that would hardly bewilder for a moment any
other forest animal, unless it be the skunk, another sluggish
non-combatant of our woodlands. Immunity from foes, from effort,
from struggle is always purchased with a price.

Certain of our natural history romancers have taken liberties
with the porcupine in one respect: they have shown him made up
into a ball and rolling down a hill. One writer makes him do this
in a sportive mood; he rolls down a long hill in the woods, and
at the bottom he is a ragged mass of leaves which his quills have
impaled--an apparition that nearly frightened a rabbit out of its
wits. Let any one who knows the porcupine try to fancy it
performing a feat like this!

Another romancer makes his porcupine roll himself into a ball
when attacked by a panther, and then on a nudge from his enemy
roll down a snowy incline into the water. I believe the little
European hedgehog can roll itself up into something like a ball,
but our porcupine does not. I have tried all sorts of tricks with
him, and made all sorts of assaults upon him, at different times,
and I have never yet seen him assume the globular form. It would
not be the best form for him to assume, because it would partly
expose his vulnerable under side. The one thing the porcupine
seems bent upon doing at all times is to keep right side up with
care. His attitude of defense is crouching close to the ground,
head drawn in and pressed down, the circular shield of large
quills upon his back opened and extended as far as possible, and
the tail stretched back rigid and held close upon the ground.
"Now come on," he says, "if you want to." The tail is his weapon
of active defense; with it he strikes upward like lightning, and
drives the quills into whatever they touch. In his chapter called
"In Panoply of Spears," Mr. Roberts paints the porcupine without
taking any liberties with the creature's known habits. He
portrays one characteristic of the porcupine very felicitously:
"As the porcupine made his resolute way through the woods, the
manner of his going differed from that of all the other kindreds
of the wild. He went not furtively. He had no particular
objection to making a noise. He did not consider it necessary to
stop every little while, stiffen himself to a monument of
immobility, cast wary glances about the gloom, and sniff the air
for the taint of enemies. He did not care who knew of his coming,
and he did not greatly care who came. Behind his panoply of
biting spears he felt himself secure, and in that security he
moved as if he held in fee the whole green, shadowy, perilous
woodland world."




III

HUMAN TRAITS IN THE ANIMALS


That there is a deal of human nature in the lower animals is a
very obvious fact; or we may turn the proposition around and say,
with equal truth, that there is a deal of animal nature in us
humans. If man is of animal origin, as we are now all coming to
believe, how could this be otherwise? We are all made of one
stuff, the functions of our bodies are practically the same, and
the workings of our instincts and our emotional and involuntary
natures are in many ways identical. I am not now thinking of any
part or lot which the lower orders may have in our intellectual
or moral life, a point upon which, as my reader may know, I
diverge from the popular conception of these matters, but of the
extent in which they share with us the ground or basement story
of the house of life--certain fundamental traits, instincts, and
blind gropings.

Man is a bundle of instincts, impulses, predilections, race and
family affinities, and antagonisms, supplemented by the gift of
reason--a gift of which he sometimes makes use. The animal is a
bundle of instincts, impulses, affinities, appetites, and race
traits, without the extra gift of reason.

The animal has sensation, perception, and power of association,
and these suffice it. Man has sensation, perception, memory,
comparison, ideality, judgment, and the like, which suffice him.

There can be no dispute, I suppose, as to certain emotions and
impulses being exclusively human, such as awe, veneration,
humility, reverence, self-sacrifice, shame, modesty, and many
others that are characteristic of what we call our moral nature.
Then there are certain others that we share with our dumb
neighbors--curiosity, jealousy, joy, anger, sex love, the
maternal and paternal instinct, the instinct of fear, of
self-preservation, and so forth.

There is at least one instinct or faculty that the animals have
far more fully developed than we have--the homing instinct, which
seems to imply a sense of direction that we have not. We have
lost it because we have other faculties to take its place, just
as we have lost that acute sense of smell that is so marvelously
developed in many of the four-footed creatures. It has long been
a contention of mine that the animals all possess the knowledge
and intelligence which is necessary to their self-preservation
and the perpetuity of the species, and that is about all. This
homing instinct seems to be one of the special powers that the
animals cannot get along without. If the solitary wasp, for
instance, could not find her way back to that minute spot in the
field where her nest is made, a feat quite impossible to you or
me, so indistinguishable to our eye is that square inch of ground
in which her hole is made; or if the fur seal could not in spring
retrace its course to the islands upon which it breeds, through a
thousand leagues of pathless sea water, how soon the tribe of
each would perish!

The animal is, like the skater, a marvel of skill in one field
or element, or in certain fixed conditions, while man's varied
but less specialized powers make him at home in many fields. Some
of the animals outsee man, outsmell him, outhear him, outrun him,
outswim him, because their lives depend more upon these special
powers than his does; but he can outwit them all because he has
the resourcefulness of reason, and is at home in many different
fields. The condor "houses herself with the sky" that she may
have a high point of observation for the exercise of that
marvelous power of vision. An object in the landscape beneath
that would escape the human eye is revealed to the soaring
buzzard. It stands these birds in hand to see thus sharply; their
dinner depends upon it. If mine depended upon such powers of
vision, in the course of time I might come to possess it. I am
not certain but that we have lost another power that I suspect
the lower animals possess--something analogous to, or identical
with, what we call telepathy--power to communicate without words,
or signs, or signals. There are many things in animal life, such
as the precise concert of action among flocks of birds and fishes
and insects, and, at times, the unity of impulse among land
animals, that give support to the notion that the wild creatures
in some way come to share one another's mental or emotional
states to a degree and in a way that we know little or nothing
of. It seems important to their well-being that they should have
such a gift--something to make good to them the want of language
and mental concepts, and insure unity of action in the tribe.
Their seasonal migrations from one part of the country to another
are no doubt the promptings of an inborn instinct called into
action in all by the recurrence of the same outward conditions;
but the movements of the flock or the school seem to imply a
common impulse that is awakened on the instant in each member of
the flock. The animals have no systems or methods in the sense
that we have, but like conditions with them always awaken like
impulses, and unity of action is reached without outward
communication.

The lower animals seem to have certain of our foibles, and
antagonisms, and unreasoning petulancies. I was reminded of this
in reading the story President Roosevelt tells of a Colorado bear
he once watched at close quarters. The bear was fussing around a
carcass of a deer, preparatory to burying it. "Once the bear lost
his grip and rolled over during the course of some movement, and
this made him angry and he struck the carcass a savage whack,
just as a pettish child will strike a table against which it has
knocked itself." Who does not recognize that trait in himself:
the disposition to vent one's anger upon inanimate things--upon
his hat, for instance, when the wind snatches it off his head and
drops it in the mud or leads him a chase for it across the
street; or upon the stick that tripped him up, or the beam
against which he bumped his head? We do not all carry our anger
so far as did a little three-year-old maiden I heard of, who, on
tripping over the rockers of her chair, promptly picked herself
up, and carrying the chair to a closet, pushed it in and
spitefully shut the door on it, leaving it alone in the dark to
repent its wrong-doing.

Our blind, unreasoning animal anger is excited by whatever
opposes or baffles us. Of course, when we yield to the anger, we
do not act as reasonable beings, but as the unreasoning animals.
It is hard for one to control this feeling when the opposition
comes from some living creature, as a balky horse or a kicking
cow, or a pig that will not be driven through the open gate. When
I was a boy, I once saw one of my uncles kick a hive of bees off
the stand and halfway across the yard, because the bees stung him
when he was about to "take them up." I confess to a fair share of
this petulant, unreasoning animal or human trait, whichever it
may be, myself. It is difficult for me to refrain from jumping
upon my hat when, in my pursuit of it across the street, it has
escaped me two or three times just as I was about to put my hand
upon it, and as for a balky horse or a kicking cow, I never could
trust myself to deal reasonably with them. Follow this feeling
back a few thousand years, and we reach the time when our
forbears looked upon all the forces in nature as in league
against them. The anger of the gods as shown in storms and winds
and pestilence and defeat is a phase of the same feeling. A wild
animal caught in a steel trap vents its wrath upon the bushes and
sticks and trees and rocks within its reach. Something is to
blame, something baffles it and gives it pain, and its teeth
and claws seek every near object. Of course it is a blind
manifestation of the instinct of self-defense, just as was my
uncle's act when he kicked over his beehive, or as is the
angler's impatience when his line gets tangled and his hook gets
fast. If the Colorado bear caught his fish with a hook and line,
how many times would he lose his temper during the day!

I do not think many animals show their kinship to us by
exhibiting the trait I am here discussing. Probably birds do not
show it at all. I have seen a nest-building robin baffled and
delayed, day after day, by the wind that swept away the straws
and rubbish she carried to the top of a timber under my porch.
But she did not seem to lose her temper. She did not spitefully
reclaim the straws and strings that would persist in falling to
the porch floors, but cheerfully went away in search of more. So
I have seen a wood thrush time after time carrying the same piece
of paper to a branch from which the breeze dislodged it, without
any evidence of impatience. It is true that when a string or a
horsehair which a bird is carrying to its nest gets caught in a
branch, the bird tugs at it again and again to free it from
entanglement, but I have never seen any evidence of impatience or
spite against branch or string, as would be pretty sure to be the
case did my string show such a spirit of perversity. Why your dog
bites the stone which you roll for him when he has found it, or
gnaws the stick you throw, is not quite clear, unless it be from
the instinct of his primitive ancestors to bite and kill the game
run down in the chase. Or is the dog trying to punish the stick
or stone because it will not roll or fly for him? The dog is
often quick to resent a kick, be it from man or beast, but I have
never known him to show anger at the door that slammed to and hit
him. Probably, if the door held him by his tail or his limb, it
would quickly receive the imprint of his teeth.

In reading Bostock on the "Training of Wild Animals," my
attention was arrested by the remark that his performing lions
and tigers are liable to suffer from "stage fright," like
ordinary mortals, but that "once thoroughly accustomed to the
stage, they seem to find in it a sort of intoxication well known
to a species higher in the order of nature;" and furthermore,
that "nearly all trainers assert that animals are affected by the
attitude of an audience, that they are stimulated by the applause
of an enthusiastic house, and perform indifferently before a cold
audience." If all this is not mere fancy, but is really a fact
capable of verification, it shows another human trait in animals
that one would not expect to find there. Bears seem to show more
human nature than most other animals. Bostock says that they
evidently love to show off before an audience: "The conceit and
good opinion of themselves, which some performing bears have, is
absolutely ridiculous." A trainer once trained a young bear to
climb a ladder and set free the American flag, and so proud did
the bear become of his accomplishment, that whenever any one was
looking on he would go through the whole performance by himself,
"evidently simply for the pleasure of doing it." Of course there
is room for much fancy here on the part of the spectator, but
bears are in so many ways--in their play, in their boxing, in
their walking--such grotesque parodies of man, that one is
induced to accept the trainer's statements as containing a
measure of truth.




IV

THE DOWNY WOODPECKER


I

It always gives me a little pleasurable emotion when I see in the
autumn woods where the downy woodpecker has just been excavating
his winter quarters in a dead limb or tree-trunk. I am walking
along a trail or wood-road when I see something like coarse new
sawdust scattered on the ground. I know at once what carpenter
has been at work in the trees overhead, and I proceed to
scrutinize the trunks and branches. Presently I am sure to detect
a new round hole about an inch and a half in diameter on the
under side of a dead limb, or in a small tree-trunk. This is
Downy's cabin, where he expects to spend the winter nights, and a
part of the stormy days, too.

When he excavates it in an upright tree-trunk, he usually
chooses a spot beneath a limb; the limb forms a sort of rude
hood, and prevents the rainwater from running down into it. It is
a snug and pretty retreat, and a very safe one, I think. I doubt
whether the driving snow ever reaches him, and no predatory owl
could hook him out with its claw. Near town or in town the
English sparrow would probably drive him out; but in the woods, I
think, he is rarely molested, though in one instance I knew him
to be dispossessed by a flying squirrel.

On stormy days I have known Downy to return to his chamber in
mid-afternoon, and to lie abed there till ten in the morning.

I have no knowledge that any other species of our woodpeckers
excavate these winter quarters, but they probably do. The
chickadee has too slender a beak for such work, and usually
spends the winter nights in natural cavities or in the abandoned
holes of Downy.


II

As I am writing here in my study these November days, a downy
woodpecker is excavating a chamber in the top of a chestnut post
in the vineyard a few yards below me, or rather, he is enlarging
a chamber which he or one of his fellows excavated last fall; he
is making it ready for his winter quarters. A few days ago I saw
him enlarging the entrance and making it a more complete circle.
Now he is in the chamber itself working away like a carpenter. I
hear his muffled hammering as I approach cautiously on the grass.
I make no sound and the hammering continues till I have stood for
a moment beside the post, then it suddenly stops and Downy's head
appears at the door. He glances at me suspiciously and then
hurries away in much excitement.

How did he know there was some one so near? As birds have no
sense of smell it must have been by some other means. I return to
my study and in about fifteen minutes Downy is back at work.
Again I cautiously and silently approach, but he is now more
alert, and when I am the width of three grape rows from him he
rushes out of his den and lets off his sharp, metallic cry as he
hurries away to some trees below the hill.

He does not return to his work again that afternoon. But I feel
certain that he will pass the night there and every night all
winter unless he is disturbed. So when my son and I are passing
along the path by his post with a lantern about eight o'clock in
the evening, I pause and say, "Let's see if Downy is at home." A
slight tap on the post and we hear Downy jump out of bed, as it
were, and his head quickly fills the doorway. We pass hurriedly
on and he does not take flight.

A few days later, just at sundown, as I am walking on the
terrace above, I see Downy come sweeping swiftly down through the
air on that long galloping flight of his, and alight on the big
maple on the brink of the hill above his retreat. He sits
perfectly still for a few moments, surveying the surroundings,
and, seeing that the coast is clear, drops quickly and silently
down and disappears in the interior of his chestnut lodge. He
will do this all winter long, coming home, when the days are
stormy, by four o'clock, and not stirring out in the morning till
nine or ten o'clock. Some very cold, blustering days he will
probably not leave his retreat at all.

He has no mate or fellow lodger, though there is room in his
cabin for three birds at least. Where the female is I can only
conjecture; maybe she is occupying a discarded last year's lodge,
as I notice there are a good many new holes drilled in the trees
every fall, though many of the old ones still seem intact.

During the inclement season Downy is anything but chivalrous or
even generous. He will not even share with the female the marrow
bone or bit of suet that I fasten on the maple in front of my
window, but drives her away rudely. Sometimes the hairy
woodpecker, a much larger bird, routs Downy out and wrecks his
house. Sometimes the English sparrows mob him and dispossess him.
In the woods the flying squirrels often turn him out of doors and
furnish his chamber cavity to suit themselves.


III

I am always content if I can bring home from my walks the least
bit of live natural history, as when, the other day, I saw a
red-headed woodpecker having a tilt with a red squirrel on the
trunk of a tree.

Doubtless the woodpecker had a nest near by, and had had some
experience with this squirrel as a nest-robber. When I first saw
them, the bird was chasing the squirrel around the trunk of an
oak-tree, his bright colors of black and white and red making his
every movement conspicuous. The squirrel avoided him by darting
quickly to the other side of the tree.

Then the woodpecker took up his stand on the trunk of a tree a
few yards distant, and every time the squirrel ventured timidly
around where he could be seen the woodpecker would swoop down at
him, making another loop of bright color. The squirrel seemed to
enjoy the fun and to tempt the bird to make this ineffectual
swoop. Time and again he would poke his head round the tree and
draw the fire of his red-headed enemy. Occasionally the bird made
it pretty hot for him, and pressed him closely, but he could
escape because he had the inside ring, and was so artful a
dodger. As often as he showed himself on the woodpecker's side,
the bird would make a vicious pass at him; and there would follow
a moment of lively skurrying around the trunk of the old oak;
then all would be quiet again.

Finally the squirrel seemed to get tired of the sport, and ran
swiftly to the top and off through the branches into the
neighboring trees. As this was probably all the woodpecker was
fighting for, he did not give chase.




V

A BARN-DOOR OUTLOOK


I have a barn-door outlook because I have a hay-barn study, and I
chose a hay-barn study because I wanted a barn-door outlook--a
wide, near view into fields and woods and orchards where I could
be on intimate terms with the wild life about me, and with free,
open-air nature.

Usually there is nothing small or stingy about a barn door, and a
farmer's hay-barn puts only a very thin partition between you and
the outside world. Therefore, what could be a more fit place to
thresh out dry philosophical subjects than a barn floor? I have a
few such subjects to thresh out, and I thresh them here, turning
them over as many times as we used to turn over the oat and rye
sheaves in the old days when I wielded the hickory flail with my
brothers on this same barn floor.

What a pleasure it is to look back to those autumn days,
generally in September or early October, when we used to thresh
out a few bushels of the new crop of rye to be taken to the
grist-mill for a fresh supply of flour! How often we paused in
our work to munch apples that had been mellowing in the haymow by
our side, and look out through the big doorway upon the sunlit
meadows and hill-slopes! The sound of the flail is heard in the
old barn no more, but in its stead the scratching of a pen and
the uneasy stirring of a man seated there behind a big box,
threshing out a harvest for a loaf of much less general value.

As I sit here day after day, bending over my work, I get many
glimpses of the little rills of wild life that circulate about
me. The feature of it that impresses me most is the life of fear
that most of the wild creatures lead. They are as alert and
cautious as are the picket-lines of opposing armies. Just over
the line of stone wall in the orchard a woodchuck comes
hesitatingly out of his hole and goes nibbling in the grass not
fifty feet away. How alert and watchful he is! Every few moments
he sits upright and takes an observation, then resumes his
feeding. When I make a slight noise he rushes to the cover of the
stone wall. Then, as no danger appears, he climbs to the top of
it and looks in my direction. As I move as if to get up, he drops
back quietly to his hole.

A chipmunk comes along on the stone wall, hurrying somewhere on
an important errand, but changing his course every moment. He
runs on the top of the wall, then along its side, then into it
and through it and out on the other side, pausing every few
seconds and looking and listening, careful not to expose himself
long in any one position, really skulking and hiding all along
his journey. His enemies are keen and watchful and likely to
appear at any moment, and he knows it, not so much by experience
as by instinct. His young are timid and watchful the first time
they emerge from the den into the light of day.

Then a red squirrel comes spinning along. By jerks and nervous,
spasmodic spurts he rushes along from cover to cover like a
soldier dodging the enemy's bullets. When he discovers me, he
pauses, and with one paw on his heart appears to press a button,
that lets off a flood of snickering, explosive sounds that seem
like ridicule of me and my work. Failing to get any response from
me, he presently turns, and, springing from the wall to the
bending branch of a near apple-tree, he rushes up and disappears
amid the foliage. Presently I see him on the end of a branch,
where he seizes a green apple not yet a third grown, and, darting
down to a large horizontal branch, sits up with the apple in his
paws and proceeds to chip it up for the pale, unripe seeds at its
core, all the time keenly alive to possible dangers that may
surround him. What a nervous, hustling, highstrung creature he
is--a live wire at all times and places! That pert curl of the
end of his tail, as he sits chipping the apple or cutting through
the shell of a nut, is expressive of his character. What a
contrast his nervous and explosive activity presents to the more
sedate and dignified life of the gray squirrel! One of these
passed us only a few yards away on our walk in the woods the
other day--a long, undulating line of soft gray, silent as a
spirit and graceful as a wave on the beach.

A little later, in the fine, slow-falling rain, a rabbit suddenly
emerges into my field of vision fifty feet away. How timid and
scared she looks! She pauses a moment amid the weeds, then hops
a yard or two and pauses again, then passes under the bars
and hesitates on the edge of a more open and exposed place
immediately in front of me. Here she works her nose, feeling of
every current of air, analyzing every scent to see if danger is
near. Apparently detecting something suspicious in the currents
that drift from my direction, she turns back, pauses again, works
her nose as before, then hurries out of my sight.

Yesterday I saw a rat stealing green peas from my garden in the
open day. He darted out of the stone wall six or eight feet away
to the row of peas, rushed about nervously among the vines; then,
before I could seize my rifle, darted back to the cover of the
wall. Once I cautiously approached his hiding-place in the wall
and waited. Presently his head emerged from the line of weeds by
the fence, his nose began working anxiously, he sifted and
resifted the air with it, and then quickly withdrew; his nose had
detected me, but his eye had not. The touchstone of most animals
is the nose, and not the eye. The eye quickly detects objects in
motion, but not those at rest; this is the function of the nose.

A highhole alights on the ground in full view in the orchard
twenty yards away, and, spying my motionless figure, pauses and
regards me long and intently. His eye serves him, and not his
nose. Finally concluding that I am not dangerous, he stoops to
the turf for his beloved ants and other insects, but lifts his
head every few seconds to see that no danger is imminent. Not one
moment is he off his guard. A hawk may suddenly swoop from the
air above, or a four-footed foe approach from any side. I have
seen a sharp-shinned hawk pick up a highhole from the turf in a
twinkling under just such conditions. What a contrast between the
anxious behavior of these wild creatures and the ease and
indifference of the grazing cattle!

All the wild creatures evidently regard me with mingled feelings
of curiosity and distrust. A song sparrow hops and flirts and
attitudinizes and peers at me from the door-sill, wondering if
there is any harm in me. A ph[oe]be-bird comes in and flits
about, disturbed by my presence. For the third or fourth time
this season, I think, she is planning a nest. In June she began
one over a window on the porch where I sleep in the open air. She
had the foundation laid when I appeared, and was not a little
disturbed by my presence, especially in the early morning, when I
wanted to sleep and she wanted to work. She let fall some of her
mortar upon me, but at least I had no fear of a falling brick.
She gradually got used to me, and her work was progressing into
the moss stage when two women appeared and made their beds upon
the porch, and in the morning went to and fro with brooms, of
course. Then Ph[oe]be seemed to say to herself, "This is too
much," and she left her unfinished nest and resorted to the empty
hay-barn. Here she built a nest on one of the bark-covered end
timbers halfway up the big mow, not being quite as used to barns
and the exigencies of haying-times as swallows are, who build
their mud nests against the rafters in the peak. She had
deposited her eggs, when the haymakers began pitching hay into
the space beneath her; sweating, hurrying haymakers do not see or
regard the rights or wants of little birds. Like a rising tide
the fragrant hay rose and covered the timber and the nest, and
crept on up toward the swallow's unfledged family in the peak,
but did not quite reach it.

Ph[oe]be and her mate hung about the barn disconsolate for days,
and now, ten days later, she is hovering about my open door on
the floor below, evidently prospecting for another building-site.
I hope she will find me so quiet and my air so friendly that she
will choose a niche on the hewn timber over my head. Just this
moment I saw her snap up a flying "miller" in the orchard a few
rods away. She was compelled to swoop four times before she
intercepted that little moth in its unsteady, zigzagging flight.
She is an expert at this sort of thing; it is her business to
take her game on the wing; but the moths are experts in zigzag
flying, and Ph[oe]be missed her mark three times. I heard the
snap of her beak at each swoop. It is almost impossible for any
insectivorous bird except a flycatcher to take a moth or a
butterfly on the wing.

Last year in August the junco, or common snowbird, came into the
big barn and built her nest in the side of the haymow, only a few
feet from me. The clean, fragrant hay attracted her as it had
attracted me. One would have thought that in a haymow she had
nesting material near at hand. But no; her nest-building
instincts had to take the old rut; she must bring her own
material from without; the haymow was only the mossy bank or the
wood-side turf where her species had hidden their nests for
untold generations. She did not weave one spear of the farmer's
hay into her nest, but brought in the usual bits of dry grass and
weeds and horsehair and shaped the fabric after the old pattern,
tucking it well in under the drooping locks of hay. As I sat
morning after morning weaving my thoughts together and looking
out of the great barn doorway into sunlit fields, the junco wove
her straws and horsehairs, and deposited there on three
successive days her three exquisite eggs.

Why the bird departed so widely from the usual habits of
nest-building of her species, who can tell? I had never before
seen a junco's nest except on the ground in remote fields, or in
mossy banks by the side of mountain roads. This nest is the
finest to be found upon the ground, its usual lining of horsehair
makes its interior especially smooth and shapely, and the nest in
the haymow showed only a little falling-off, as is usually the
case in the second nest of the season. The songs of the birds,
the construction of their nests, and the number of their eggs
taper off as the season wanes.

The junco impresses me as a fidgety, emphatic, feather-edged sort
of bird; the two white quills in its tail which flash out so
suddenly on every movement seem to stamp in this impression. My
junco was a little nervous at first and showed her white quills,
but she soon grew used to my presence, and would alight upon the
chair which I kept for callers, and upon my hammock-ropes.

When an artist came to paint my portrait amid such rustic
surroundings, the bird only eyed her a little suspiciously at
first, and then went forward with her own affairs. One night the
wind blew the easel with its canvas over against the haymow where
the nest was placed, but the bird was there on her eggs in the
morning. Her wild instincts did not desert her in one respect, at
least: when I would flush her from the nest she would drop down
to the floor and with spread plumage and fluttering movements
seek for a moment to decoy me away from the nest, after the habit
of most ground-builders. The male came about the barn frequently
with three or four other juncos, which I suspect were the first or
June brood of the pair, now able to take care of themselves, but
still held together by the family instinct, as often happens in
the case of some other birds, such as bluebirds and chickadees.

My little mascot hatched all her eggs, and all went well with
mother and young until, during my absence of three or four days,
some night-prowler, probably a rat, plundered the nest, and the
little summer idyl in the heart of the old barn abruptly ended. I
saw the juncos no more.

While I was so closely associated with the junco in the old barn
I had a good chance to observe her incubating habits. I was
surprised at the frequent and long recesses that she took during
school-hours. Every hour during the warmest days she was off from
ten to twelve minutes, either to take the air or to take a bite,
or to let up on the temperature of her eggs, or to have a word
with her other family; I am at a loss to know which. Toward the
end of her term, which was twelve days, and as the days grew
cooler, she was not gadding out and in so often, but kept her
place three or four hours at a time.

When the young were hatched they seemed mainly fed with
insects--spiders or flies gathered off the timbers and clapboards
of the inside of the barn. It was a pretty sight to see the
mother-bird making the rounds of the barn, running along the
timbers, jumping up here and there, and seizing some invisible
object, showing the while her white petticoats--as a French girl
called that display of white tail-feathers.

Day after day and week after week as I look through the big,
open barn door I see a marsh hawk beating about low over the
fields. He, or rather she (for I see by the greater size and
browner color that it is the female), moves very slowly and
deliberately on level, flexible wing, now over the meadow, now
over the oat or millet field, then above the pasture and the
swamp, tacking and turning, her eye bent upon the ground, and no
doubt sending fear or panic through the heart of many a nibbling
mouse or sitting bird. She occasionally hesitates or stops in her
flight and drops upon the ground, as if seeking insects or frogs
or snakes. I have never yet seen her swoop or strike after the
manner of other hawks. It is a pleasure to watch her through the
glass and see her make these circuits of the fields on effortless
wing, day after day, and strike no bird or other living thing, as
if in quest of something she never finds. I never see the male.
She has perhaps assigned him other territory to hunt over. He is
smaller, with more blue in his plumage. One day she had a scrap
or a game of some kind with three or four crows on the side of a
rocky hill. I think the crows teased and annoyed her. I heard
their cawing and saw them pursuing the hawk, and then saw her
swoop upon them or turn over in the air beneath them, as if to
show them what feats she could do on the wing that were beyond
their powers. The crows often made a peculiar guttural cawing and
cackling as if they enjoyed the sport, but they were clumsy and
awkward enough on the wing compared to the hawk. Time after time
she came down upon them from a point high in the air, like a
thunderbolt, but never seemed to touch them. Twice I saw her
swoop upon them as they sat upon the ground, and the crows called
out in half sportive, half protesting tones, as if saying, "That
was a little too close; beware, beware!" It was like a skillful
swordsman flourishing his weapon about the head of a peasant; but
not a feather was touched so far as I could see. It is the only
time I ever saw this hawk in a sportive or aggressive mood. I
have seen jays tease the sharp-shinned hawk in this way, and
escape his retaliating blows by darting into a cedar-tree. All
the crow tribe, I think, love to badger and mock some of their
neighbors.

How much business the crows seem to have apart from hunting
their living! I hear their voices in the morning before sun-up,
sounding out from different points of the fields and woods, as if
every one of them were giving or receiving orders for the day:
"Here, Jim, you do this; here, Corvus, you go there, and put that
thing through"; and Jim caws back a response, and Corvus says,
"I'm off this minute." I get the impression that it is convention
day or general training day with them. There are voices in all
keys of masculinity and femininity. Here and there seems to be
one in authority who calls at intervals, "Haw-ah, haw, haw-ah!"
Others utter a strident "Haw!" still others a rapid, feminine
call. Some seem hurrying, others seem at rest, but the landscape
is apparently alive with crows carrying out some plan of
concerted action. How fond they must be of one another! What boon
companions they are! In constant communication, saluting one
another from the trees, the ground, the air, watchful of one
another's safety, sharing their plunder, uniting against a common
enemy, noisy, sportive, predacious, and open and aboveboard in
all their ways and doings--how much character our ebony friend
possesses, in how many ways he challenges our admiration!

What a contrast the crow presents to the silent, solitary hawk!
The hawks have but two occupations--hunting and soaring; they
have no social or tribal relations, and make no show of business
as does the crow. The crow does not hide; he seems to crave the
utmost publicity; his goings and comings are advertised with all
the effectiveness of his strident voice; but all our hawks are
silent and stealthy.

Let me return to the red squirrel, because he returns to me
hourly. He is the most frisky, diverting, and altogether impish
of all our wild creatures. He is a veritable Puck. All the other
wild folk that cross my field of vision, or look in upon me here
in my fragrant hay-barn study, seem to have but one feeling about
me: "What is it? Is it dangerous? Has it any designs upon me?"
But my appearance seems to awaken other feelings in the red
squirrel. He pauses on the fence or on the rail before me, and
goes through a series of antics and poses and hilarious gestures,
giving out the while a stream of snickering, staccato sounds that
suggest unmistakably that I am a source of mirth and ridicule to
him. His gestures and attitudes are all those of mingled mirth,
curiosity, defiance, and contempt--seldom those of fear. He comes
spinning along on the stone wall in front of me, with those
abrupt, nervous pauses every few yards that characterize all his
movements. On seeing me he checks his speed, and with depressed
tail impels himself along, a few inches at a time, in a series of
spasmodic starts and sallies; the hind part of his body
flattened, and his legs spread, his head erect and alert, his
tail full of kinks and quirks. How that tail undulates! Now its
end curls, now it is flattened to the stone, now it springs
straight up as if part of a trap, hind feet the while keeping
time in a sort of nervous dance with the shrill, strident
cackling and snickering. The next moment he is sitting erect with
fore paws pressed against his white chest, his tail rippling out
behind him or up his back, and his shrill, nasal tones still
pouring out. He hops to the next stone, he assumes a new
position, his tail palpitates and jerks more lively than ever;
now he is on all fours, with curved back; now he sits up at an
angle, his tail all the time charged with mingled suspicion and
mirth. Then he springs to a rail that runs out at right angles
from the wall toward me, and with hectoring snickers and shrill
trebles, pointed straight at me, keeps up his performance. What
an actor he is! What a furry embodiment of quick, nervous energy
and impertinence! Surely he has a sense of something like humor;
surely he is teasing and mocking me and telling me, both by
gesture and by word of mouth, that I present a very ridiculous
appearance.

A chipmunk comes hurrying along with stuffed cheek-pouches,
traveling more on the side of the wall than on the top, stopping
every few yards to see that the way is clear, but giving little
heed to me or to the performing squirrel. In comparison the
chipmunk is a demure, preoccupied, pretty little busybody who
often watches you curiously, but never mocks you or pokes fun at
you; while the gray squirrel has the manners of the best-bred
wood-folk, and he goes his way without fuss or bluster, a picture
of sylvan grace and buoyancy.

All the movements of the red squirrel are quick, sharp, jerky,
machine-like. He does nothing slowly or gently; everything with a
snap and a jerk. His progression is a series of interrupted
sallies. When he pauses on the stone wall he faces this way and
that with a sudden jerk; he turns round in two or three quick
leaps. So abrupt and automatic in his movements, so stiff and
angular in behavior, yet he is charged and overflowing with life
and energy. One thinks of him as a bundle of steel wires and
needles and coiled springs, all electrically charged. One of his
sounds or calls is like the buzz of a reel or the whirr of an
alarm-clock. Something seems to touch a spring there in the old
apple-tree, and out leaps this strident sound as of spinning
brass wheels.

When I speak sharply to him, in the midst of his antics, he
pauses a moment with uplifted paw, watching me intently, and then
with a snicker springs upon a branch of an apple-tree that hangs
down near the wall, and disappears amid the foliage. The red
squirrel is always actively saucy, aggressively impudent. He
peeps in at me through a broken pane in the window and snickers;
he strikes up a jig on the stone underpinning twenty feet away
and mocks; he darts in and out among the timbers and chatters and
giggles; he climbs up over the door, pokes his head in, and lets
off a volley; he moves by jerks along the sill a few feet from my
head and chirps derisively; he eyes me from points on the wall in
front, or from some coign of vantage in the barn, and flings his
anger or his contempt upon me.

No other of our wood-folk has such a facile, emotional tail as
the red squirrel. It seems as if an electric current were running
through it most of the time; it vibrates, it ripples, it curls,
it jerks, it arches, it flattens; now it is like a plume in his
cap; now it is a cloak around his shoulders; then it is an
instrument to point and emphasize his states of emotional
excitement; every movement of his body is seconded or reflected
in his tail. There seems to be some automatic adjustment between
his tail and his vocal machinery.

The tail of the gray squirrel shows to best advantage when he is
running over the ground in the woods--and a long, graceful,
undulating line of soft silver gray the creature makes! In my
part of the country the gray squirrel is more strictly a
wood-dweller than the red, and has the grace and elusiveness that
belong more especially to the sylvan creatures.

The red squirrel can play a tune and accompany himself.
Underneath his strident, nasal snicker you may hear a note in
another key, much finer and shriller. Or it is as if the volume
of sound was split up into two strains, one proceeding from his
throat and the other from his mouth.

If the red squirrels do not have an actual game of tag, they
have something so near it that I cannot tell the difference. Just
now I see one in hot pursuit of another on the stone wall; both
are apparently going at the top of their speed. They make a red
streak over the dark-gray stones. When the pursuer seems to
overtake the pursued and becomes "It," the race is reversed, and
away they go on the back track with the same fleetness of the
hunter and the hunted, till things are reversed again. I have
seen them engaged in the same game in tree-tops, each one having
his innings by turn.

The gray squirrel comes and goes, but the red squirrel we have
always with us. He will live where the gray will starve. He is a
true American; he has nearly all the national traits--nervous
energy, quickness, resourcefulness, pertness, not to say
impudence and conceit. He is not altogether lovely or blameless.
He makes war on the chipmunk, he is a robber of birds' nests, and
is destructive of the orchard fruits. Nearly every man's hand is
against him, yet he thrives, and long may he continue to do so!

One day I placed some over-ripe plums on the wall in front of me
to see what he would do with them. At first he fell eagerly to
releasing the pit, and then to cutting his way to the kernel in
the pit. After one of them had been disposed of in this way, he
proceeded to carry off the others and place them here and there
amid the branches of a plum-tree from which he had stolen every
plum long before they were ripe. A day or two later I noted that
they had all been removed from this tree, and I found some of
them in the forks of an apple-tree not far off.

A small butternut-tree standing near the wall had only a score or
so of butternuts upon it this year; the squirrels might be seen
almost any hour in the day darting about the branches of that
tree, hunting the green nuts, and in early September the last nut
was taken. They carried them away and placed them, one here and
one there, in the forks of the apple-trees. I noticed that they
did not depend upon the eye to find the nuts; they did not look
the branches over from some lower branch as you and I would have
done; they explored the branches one by one, running out to the
end, and, if the nut was there, seized it and came swiftly down.
I think the red squirrel rarely lays up any considerable store,
but hides his nuts here and there in the trees and upon the
ground. This habit makes him the planter of future trees, of
oaks, hickories, chestnuts, and butternuts. These heavy nuts get
widely scattered by this agency.

One morning I saw a chipmunk catch a flying grasshopper on the
wing. Little Striped-Back sat on the wall with stuffed pockets,
waiting for something, when along came the big grasshopper in a
hesitating, uncertain manner of flight. As it hovered above the
chipmunk, the latter by a quick, dexterous movement sprang or
reached up and caught it, and in less than one half-minute its
fanlike wings were opening out in front of the captor's mouth and
its body was being eagerly devoured. This same chipmunk, I think
it is, has his den under the barn near me. Often he comes from
the stone wall with distended cheek-pouches, and pauses fifteen
feet away, close by cover, and looks to see if any danger is
impending. To reach his hole he has to cross an open space a rod
or more wide, and the thought of it evidently agitates him a
little. I am sitting there looking over my desk upon him, and he
is skeptical about my being as harmless as I look. "Dare I cross
that ten feet of open there in front of him?" he seems to say. He
sits up with fore paws pressed so prettily to his white breast.
He is so near I can see the rapid throbbing of his chest as he
sniffs the air. A moment he sits and looks and sniffs, then in
hurried movements crosses the open, his cheek-pockets showing
full as he darts by me. He is like a baseball runner trying to
steal a base: danger lurks on all sides; he must not leave the
cover of one base till he sees the way is clear, and then--off
with a rush! Pray don't work yourself up to such a pitch, my
little neighbor; you shall make a home-run without the slightest
show of opposition from me.

One day a gray squirrel came along on the stone wall beside the
road. In front of the house he crossed an open barway, and then
paused to observe two men at work in full view near the house.
The men were a sculptor, pottering with clay, and his model. The
squirrel sprang up a near-by butternut-tree, sat down on a limb,
and had a good, long look. "Very suspicious," he seemed to think;
"maybe they are fixing a trap for me"; and he deliberately came
down the tree and returned the way he had come, spinning along
the top of the wall, his long, fine tail outlined by a narrow
band of silver as he sped off toward the woods.




VI

WILD LIFE IN WINTER


To many forms of life of our northern lands, winter means a long
sleep; to others it means what it means to many fortunate human
beings--travels in warm climes; to still others, who again have
their human prototypes, it means a struggle, more or less fierce,
to keep soul and body together; while to many insect forms it
means death.

Most of the flies and beetles, wasps and hornets, moths,
butterflies, and bumblebees die. The grasshoppers all die, with
eggs for next season's crop deposited in the ground. Some of the
butterflies winter over. The mourning cloak, the first butterfly
to be seen in spring, has passed the winter in my "Slabsides."
The monarch migrates, probably the only one of our butterflies
that does. It is a great flyer. I have seen it in the fall
sailing serenely along over the inferno of New York streets. It
has crossed the ocean and is spreading over the world. The yellow
and black hornets lose heart as autumn comes on, desert their
paper nests and die--all but the queen or mother hornet; she
hunts out a retreat in the ground and passes the winter beyond
the reach of frost. In the spring she comes forth and begins life
anew, starting a little cone-shaped paper nest, building a few
paper cells, laying an egg in each, and thus starting the new
colony.

The same is true of the bumblebees; they are the creatures of a
summer. In August, when the flowers fail, the colony breaks up,
they desert the nest and pick up a precarious subsistence on
asters and thistles till the frosts of October cut them off. You
may often see, in late September or early October, these tramp
bees passing the night or a cold rain-storm on the lee side of a
thistle-head. The queen bee alone survives. You never see her
playing the vagabond in the fall. At least I never have. She
hunts out a retreat in the ground and passes the winter there,
doubtless in a torpid state, as she stores no food against the
inclement season. Emerson has put this fact into his poem on "The
Humble-Bee":--

    "When the fierce northwestern blast
    Cools sea and land so far and fast,
    Thou already slumberest deep;
    Woe and want thou canst outsleep;
    Want and woe, which torture us,
    Thy sleep makes ridiculous."

In early August of the past year I saw a queen bumblebee quickly
enter a small hole on the edge of the road where there was no
nest. It was probably her winter quarters.

If one could take the cover off the ground in the fields and
woods in winter, or have some magic ointment put upon his eyes
that would enable him to see through opaque substances, how many
curious and interesting forms of life he would behold in the
ground beneath his feet as he took his winter walk--life with the
fires banked, so to speak, and just keeping till spring. He would
see the field crickets in their galleries in the ground in a
dormant state, all their machinery of life brought to a
standstill by the cold. He would see the ants in their hills and
in their tunnels in decaying trees and logs, as inert as the soil
or the wood they inhabit. I have chopped many a handful of the
big black ants out of a log upon my woodpile in winter, stiff,
but not dead, with the frost, and brought them in by the fire to
see their vital forces set going again by the heat. I have
brought in the grubs of borers and the big fat grubs of beetles,
turned out of their winter beds in old logs by my axe and frozen
like ice-cream, and have seen the spark of life rekindle in them
on the hearth.

With this added visual power, one would see the wood frogs and
the hylas in their winter beds but a few inches beneath the moss
and leaf-mould, one here and one there, cold, inert, biding their
time. I dug a wood frog out one December and found him not
frozen, though the soil around him was full of frost; he was
alive but not frisky. A friend of mine once found one in the
woods sitting upon the snow one day in early winter. She carried
him home with her, and he burrowed in the soil of her flower-pot
and came out all right in the spring. What brought him out upon
the snow in December one would like to know.

One would see the tree-frogs in the cavities of old trees,
wrapped in their winter sleep--which is yet not a sleep, but
suspended animation. When the day is warm, or the January thaw
comes, I fancy the little frog feels it and stirs in his bed. One
would see the warty toads squatted in the soil two or three feet
below the surface, in the same way. Probably not till April will
the spell which the winter has put upon them be broken. I have
seen a toad go into the ground in late fall. He literally elbows
his way into it, going down backwards.

Beneath rocks or in cavities at the end of some small hole in the
ground, one would see a ball or tangle of garter snakes, or black
snakes, or copperheads--dozens of individual snakes of that
locality entwined in one many-headed mass, conserving in this
united way their animal heat against the cold of winter. One
spring my neighbor in the woods discovered such a winter retreat
of the copperheads, and, visiting the place many times during the
warm April days, he killed about forty snakes, and since that
slaughter, the copperheads have been at a premium in our
neighborhood.

Here and there, near the fences and along the borders of the
wood, these X-ray eyes would see the chipmunk at the end of his
deep burrow with his store of nuts or grains, sleeping fitfully
but not dormant. The frost does not reach him and his stores are
at hand. One which we dug out in late October had nearly four
quarts of weed-seeds and cherry-pits. He will hardly be out
before March, and then, like his big brother rodent the
woodchuck, and other winter sleepers, his fancy will quickly
"turn to thoughts of love."

One would see the woodchuck asleep in his burrow, snugly rolled
up and living on his own fat. All the hibernating animals that
keep up respiration, must have sustenance of some sort--either a
store of food at hand or a store of fat in their own bodies. The
woodchuck, the bear, the coon, the skunk, the 'possum, lay up a
store of fuel in their own bodies, and they come out in the
spring lean and hungry. The squirrels are lean the year through,
and hence must have a store of food in their dens, as does the
chipmunk, or else be more or less active in their search all
winter, as is the case with the red and gray squirrels. The fox
puts on more or less fat in the fall, because he will need it
before spring. His food-supply is very precarious; he may go many
days without a morsel. I have known him to be so hungry that he
would eat frozen apples and corn which he could not digest. The
hare and the rabbit, on the other hand, do not store up fat
against a time of need; their food-supply of bark and twigs is
constant, no matter how deep the snows. The birds of prey that
pass the winter in the north take on a coat of fat in the fall,
because their food-supply is so uncertain; the coat of fat is
also a protection against the cold.

Of course, all the wild creatures are in better condition in the
fall than in the spring, but in many cases the fat is distinctly
a substitute for food.

The skunk is in his den also from December till February, living
on his own fat. Several of them often occupy the same den and
conserve their animal heat in that way. The coon, also, is in his
den in the rocks for a part of the winter, keeping warm on
home-made fuel. The same is true of the bear in our climate. The
bats are hibernating in the rocks or about buildings. The
muskrats are leading hidden lives in the upper chambers of their
snow-covered houses in the marshes and ponds or in the banks of
streams, feeding on lily-roots and mussels which they get under
the ice.

The lean, bloodthirsty minks and weasels are on the hunt all
winter. Our native mice are also active. That pretty stitching
upon the coverlet of the winter snow in the woods is made by our
white-footed mouse and by the little shrew mouse. The former
often has large stores of nuts hidden in some cavity in a tree;
what supply of food the latter has, if any, I do not know. In the
winter the short-tailed meadow or field mice come out of their
retreat in the ground and beneath stones and lead gay, fearless
lives beneath the snow-drifts. Their little villages, with their
runways and abandoned nests, may be seen when the snow disappears
in the spring. Their winter life beneath the snow, where no
wicked eye or murderous claw can reach them, is in sharp contrast
to their life in summer, when cats and hawks, owls and foxes,
pounce upon them day and night. It is only in times of deep snows
that they bark our fruit-trees.

We have in this latitude but one species of hibernating
mouse--the long-tailed jumping mouse, or kangaroo mouse, as it is
sometimes called from its mode of locomotion. Late one fall,
while making a road near "Slabsides," we dug one out from its
hibernation about two feet below the surface of the ground. It
was like a little ball of fur tied with a string. In my hand it
seemed as cold as if dead. Close scrutiny showed that it breathed
at intervals, very slowly. The embers of life were there, but
slumbering beneath the ashes. I put it in my pocket and went
about my work. After a little time, remembering my mouse, I put
my hand into my pocket and touched something very warm and
lively. The ember had been fanned into a flame, so to speak. I
kept my captive in a cage a day or two and then returned it to
the woods, where I trust it found a safe retreat against the
cold.




VII

BIRD LIFE IN WINTER


The distribution of our birds over the country in summer is like
that of the people, quite uniform. Every wood and field has its
quota, and no place so barren but it has some bird to visit it.
One knows where to look for sparrows and thrushes and bobolinks
and warblers and flycatchers. But the occupation of the country
by our winter residents is like the Indian occupation of the
land. They are found in little bands, a few here and there, with
large tracts quite untenanted.

One may walk for hours through the winter woods and not see or
hear a bird. Then he may come upon a troop of chickadees, with a
nuthatch or two in their wake, and maybe a downy woodpecker.
Birds not of a feather flock together at this inclement season.
The question of food is always an urgent one. Evidently the
nuthatch thinks there must be food where the chickadees flit and
call so cheerily, and the woodpecker is probably drawn to the
nuthatch for a similar reason.

Together they make a pretty thorough search,--fine, finer,
finest. The chickadee explores the twigs and smaller branches;
what he gets is on the surface, and so fine as to be almost
microscopic. The nuthatch explores the trunks and larger branches
of the trees; he goes a little deeper, into crevices of the bark
and under lichens. Then comes Downy, who goes deeper still. He
bores for larger game through the bark, and into the trunks and
branches themselves.

In late fall this band is often joined by the golden-crowned
kinglet and the brown creeper. The kinglet is finer-eyed and
finer-billed than even the chickadee, and no doubt gathers what
the latter overlooks, while the brown creeper, with his long,
slender, curved bill, takes what both the nuthatch and the
woodpecker miss. Working together, it seems as if they must make
a pretty clean sweep. But the trees are numerous and large, and
the birds are few. Only a mere fraction of tree surface is
searched over at any one time. In large forests probably only a
mere fraction of the trees are visited at all.

One cold day in midwinter, when I was walking through the
snowless woods, I saw chickadees, nuthatches, and woodpeckers
upon the ground, and upon roots and fallen branches. They were
looking for the game that had fallen, as a boy looks for apples
under the tree.

The winter wren is so called because he sometimes braves our
northern winters, but it is rarely that one sees him at this
season. I think I have seen him only two or three times in winter
in my life. The event of one long walk, recently, in February,
was seeing one of these birds. As I followed a byroad, beside a
little creek in the edge of a wood, my eye caught a glimpse of a
small brown bird darting under a stone bridge. I thought to
myself no bird but a wren would take refuge under so small a
bridge as that. I stepped down upon it and expected to see the
bird dart out at the upper end. As it did not appear, I
scrutinized the bank of the little run, covered with logs and
brush, a few rods farther up.

Presently I saw the wren curtsying and gesticulating beneath an
old log. As I approached he disappeared beneath some loose stones
in the bank, then came out again and took another peep at me,
then fidgeted about for a moment and disappeared again, running
in and out of the holes and recesses and beneath the rubbish like
a mouse or a chipmunk. The winter wren may always be known by
these squatting, bobbing-out-and-in habits.

As I sought a still closer view of him, he flitted stealthily a
few yards up the run and disappeared beneath a small plank bridge
near a house.

I wondered what he could feed upon at such a time. There was a
light skim of snow upon the ground, and the weather was cold. The
wren, so far as I know, is entirely an insect-feeder, and where
can he find insects in midwinter in our climate? Probably by
searching under bridges, under brush heaps, in holes and cavities
in banks where the sun falls warm. In such places he may find
dormant spiders and flies and other hibernating insects or their
larvæ. We have a tiny, mosquito-like creature that comes forth in
March or in midwinter, as soon as the temperature is a little
above freezing. One may see them performing their fantastic
air-dances when the air is so chilly that one buttons his
overcoat about him in his walk. They are darker than the
mosquito,--a sort of dark water-color,--and are very frail to the
touch. Maybe the wren knows the hiding-place of these insects.

With food in abundance, no doubt many more of our birds would
brave the rigors of our winters. I have known a pair of bluebirds
to brave them on such poor rations as are afforded by the
hardhack or sugarberry,--a drupe the size of a small pea, with a
thin, sweet skin. Probably hardly one per cent. of the drupe is
digestible food. Bluebirds in December will also eat the berries
of the poison ivy, as will the downy woodpecker.

Robins will pass the winter with us when the cover of a pine or
hemlock forest can be had near a supply of red cedar berries. The
cedar-bird probably finds little other food in the valley of the
Hudson and in New England, yet I see occasional flocks of them
every winter month.

Sometimes the chickadees and nuthatches, hunting through the
winter woods, make a discovery that brings every bird within
hearing to the spot,--they spy out the screech owl hiding in the
thick of a hemlock-tree. What an event it is in the day's
experience! It sets the whole clan agog.

While I was walking in the December woods, one day, my attention
was attracted by a great hue and cry among these birds. I found
them in and about a hemlock-tree,--eight or ten chickadees and
four or five red-bellied nuthatches. Such a chiding chorus of
tiny voices I had not heard for a long time. The tone was not
that of alarm so much as it was that of trouble and displeasure.

I gazed long and long up into the dark, dense green mass of the
tree to make out the cause of all this excitement. The chickadees
were clinging to the ends of the sprays, as usual, apparently
very busy looking for food, and all the time uttering their
shrill plaint. The nuthatches perched about upon the branches or
ran up and down the tree trunks, incessantly piping their
displeasure. At last I made out the cause of the disturbance,--a
little owl on a limb, looking down in wide-eyed intentness upon
me. How annoyed he must have felt at all this hullabaloo, this
lover of privacy and quiet, to have his name cried from the
treetops, and his retreat advertised to every passer-by!

I have never known woodpeckers to show any excitement at the
presence of hawk or owl, probably because they are rarely
preyed upon by these marauders. In their nests and in their
winter quarters, deeply excavated in trunk or branch of tree,
woodpeckers are beyond the reach of both beak and claw.

The day I saw the winter wren I saw two golden-crowned kinglets
fly from one sycamore to another in an open field, uttering their
fine call-notes. That so small a body can brave the giant cold of
our winters seems remarkable enough. These are mainly birds of
the evergreens, although at times they frequent the groves and
the orchards.

How does the ruby-crowned kinglet know he has a brilliant bit of
color on his crown which he can uncover at will, and that this
has great charms for the female? During the rivalries of the
males in the mating season, and in the autumn also, they flash
this brilliant ruby at each other. I witnessed what seemed to be
a competitive display of this kind one evening in November. I was
walking along the road, when my ear was attracted by the fine,
shrill lisping and piping of a small band of these birds in an
apple-tree. I paused to see what was the occasion of so much
noise and bluster among these tiny bodies. There were four or
five of them, all more or less excited, and two of them
especially so. I think the excitement of the others was only a
reflection of that of these two. These were hopping around each
other, apparently peering down upon something beneath them. I
suspected a cat concealed behind the wall, and so looked over,
but there was nothing there. Observing them more closely, I saw
that the two birds were entirely occupied with each other.

They behaved exactly as if they were comparing crowns, and each
extolling his own. Their heads were bent forward, the red crown
patch uncovered and showing as a large, brilliant cap, their
tails were spread, and the side feathers below the wings were
fluffed out. They did not come to blows, but followed each other
about amid the branches, uttering their thin, shrill notes and
displaying their ruby crowns to the utmost. Evidently it was some
sort of strife or dispute or rivalry that centred about this
brilliant patch.

Few persons seem aware that the goldfinch is also a winter
bird,--it is so brilliant and familiar in summer and so neutral
and withdrawn in winter. The call-note and manner of flight do
not change, but the color of the males and their habits are very
different from their color and habits in summer. In winter they
congregate in small, loose flocks, both sexes of a dusky
yellowish brown, and feed upon the seeds of grasses and weeds
that stand above the snow in fields and along fences.

Day after day I have observed a band of five or six of them
feeding amid the dry stalks of the evening primrose by the
roadside. They are adepts in extracting the seed from the pods.
How pretty their call to each other at such times,--_paisley_ or
_peasely_, with the rising inflection!

The only one of our winter birds that really seems a part of
the winter, that seems to be born of the whirling snow, and to
be happiest when storms drive thickest and coldest, is the
snow bunting, the real snowbird, with plumage copied from the
fields where the drifts hide all but the tops of the tallest
weeds,--large spaces of pure white touched here and there with
black and gray and brown. Its twittering call and chirrup coming
out of the white obscurity is the sweetest and happiest of all
winter bird sounds. It is like the laughter of children. The
fox-hunter hears it on the snowy hills, the farmer hears it when
he goes to fodder his cattle from the distant stack, the country
schoolboy hears it as he breaks his way through the drifts toward
the school. It is ever a voice of good cheer and contentment.

One March, during a deep snow, a large flock of buntings stayed
about my vineyards for several days, feeding upon the seeds of
redroot and other weeds that stood above the snow. What boyhood
associations their soft and cheery calls brought up! How plump
and well-fed and hardy they looked, and how alert and suspicious
they were! They evidently had had experiences with hawks and
shrikes. Every minute or two they would all spring into the air
as one bird, circle about for a moment, then alight upon the snow
again. Occasionally one would perch upon a wire or grapevine, as
if to keep watch and ward.

Presently, while I stood in front of my study looking at them, a
larger and darker bird came swiftly by me, flying low and
straight toward the buntings. He shot beneath the trellises, and
evidently hoped to surprise the birds. It was a shrike, thirsting
for blood or brains. But the buntings were on the alert, and were
up in the air before the feathered assassin reached them. As the
flock wheeled about, he joined them and flew along with them for
some distance, but made no attempt to strike that I could see.

Presently he left them and perched upon the top of a near maple.
The birds did not seem to fear him now, but swept past the
treetop where he sat as if to challenge him to a race, and then
went their way. I have seen it stated that these birds, when
suddenly surprised by a hawk, will dive beneath the snow to
escape him. They doubtless roost upon the ground, as do most
ground-builders, and hence must often be covered by the falling
snow.




VIII

A BIRDS' FREE LUNCH


One winter, during four or five weeks of severe weather, several of
our winter birds were pensioners upon my bounty,--three blue jays,
two downy woodpeckers, three chickadees, and one kinglet,--and
later a snowbird--junco--appeared.

I fastened pieces of suet and marrow-bones upon the tree in front
of my window, then, as I sat at my desk, watched the birds at their
free lunch. The jays bossed the woodpeckers, the woodpeckers bossed
the chickadees, and the chickadees bossed the kinglet.

Sometimes in my absence a crow would swoop down and boss the
whole crew and carry off the meat. The kinglet was the least of
all,--a sort of "hop-o'-my-thumb" bird. He became quite tame, and
one day alighted upon my arm as I stood leaning against the tree.
I could have put my hand upon him several times. I wonder where
the midget roosted. He was all alone. He liked the fare so well
that he seemed disposed to stop till spring. During one terrible
night of wind and snow and zero temperature I feared he would be
swept away. I thought of him in the middle of the night, when the
violence of the storm kept me from sleep. Imagine this solitary
atom in feathers drifting about in the great arctic out-of-doors
and managing to survive. I fancied him in one of my thick
spruces, his head under his tiny wing, buffeted by wind and snow,
his little black feet clinging to the perch, and wishing that
morning would come.

The fat meat is fuel for him; it keeps up the supply of animal
heat. None of the birds will eat lean meat; they want the clear
fat. The jays alight upon it and peck away with great vigor,
almost standing on tiptoe to get the proper sweep. The woodpecker
uses his head alone in pecking, but the jay's action involves the
whole body. Yet his blows are softer, not so sharp and abrupt as
those of the woodpecker. Pecking is not exactly his business.

He swallows the morsel eagerly, watching all the time lest some
enemy surprise him in the act. Indeed, one noticeable thing about
all the birds is their nervousness while eating. The chickadee
turns that bead-like eye of his in all directions incessantly,
lest something seize him while he is not looking. He is not off
his guard for a moment. It is almost painful to observe the state
of fear in which he lives. He will not keep his place upon the
bone longer than a few seconds at a time lest he become a mark
for some enemy,--a hawk, a shrike, or a cat. One would not think
the food would digest when taken in such haste and trepidation.

While the jays are feeding, swallowing morsel after morsel very
rapidly, the chickadees flit about in an anxious, peevish manner,
lest there be none left for themselves.

I suspect the jays carry the food off and hide it, as they
certainly do corn when I put it out for the hens. The jay has a
capacious throat; he will lodge half a dozen or more kernels of
corn in it, stretching his neck up as he takes them, to give them
room, and then fly away to an old bird's-nest or a caterpillar's
nest and deposit them in it. But in this respect the little
kettle cannot call the big pot black. The chickadee also will
carry away what it cannot eat. One day I dug a dozen or more
white grubs--the larvæ of some beetle--out of a decayed maple on
my woodpile and placed them upon my window-sill. The chickadees
soon discovered them, and fell to carrying them off as fast as
ever they could, distributing them among the branches of the
Norway spruces. Among the grubs was one large white one half the
size of one's little finger. One of the chickadees seized this;
it was all he could carry, but he made off with it. The mate to
this grub I found rolled up in a smooth cell in a mass of decayed
wood at the heart of the old maple referred to; it was full of
frost. I carried it in by the fire, and the next day it was alive
and apparently wanted to know what had brought spring so
suddenly.

How rapidly birds live! Their demand for food is almost
incessant. This colony of mine appear to feed every eight or ten
minutes. Their little mills grind their grist very rapidly. Once
in my walk upon the sea beach I encountered two small beach birds
running up and down in the edge of the surf, keeping just in the
thin, lace-like edging of the waves, and feeding upon the white,
cricket-like hoppers that quickly buried themselves in the sand
as the waters retreated. I kept company with the birds till they
ceased to be afraid of me. They would feed eagerly for a few
minutes and then stop, stand on one leg and put their heads under
their wings for two or three minutes, and then resume their
feeding, so rapidly did they digest their food. But all birds
digest very rapidly.

My two woodpeckers seldom leave the tree upon which the food is
placed. One is a male, as is shown by his red plume, and the
other a female. There is not a bit of kindness or amity between
them. Indeed, there is open hostility. The male will not allow
the female even to look at the meat while he is feeding. She will
sidle around toward it, edging nearer and nearer, when he will
suddenly dart at her, and often pursue her till she leaves the
tree. Every hour in the day I see him trying to drive her from
the neighborhood. She stands in perpetual dread of him, and gives
way the instant he approaches. He is a tyrant and a bully. They
both pass the night in snug chambers which they have excavated in
the decayed branch of an old apple-tree, but not together.

But in the spring what a change will come over the male. He will
protest to the female that he was only in fun, that she took him
far too seriously, that he had always cherished a liking for her.
Last April I saw a male trying his blandishments upon a female in
this way. It may have been the same pair I am now observing. The
female was extremely shy and reluctant; evidently she was
skeptical of the sincerity of so sudden a change on the part of
the male. I saw him pursue her from tree to tree with the most
flattering attention. The flight of the woodpecker is at all
times undulating, but on such occasions this feature is so
enhanced and the whole action so affected and studied on the part
of the male that the scene becomes highly amusing. The female
flew down upon a low stump in the currant-patch and was very busy
about her own affairs; the male followed, alighted on something
several rods distant, and appeared to be equally busy about his
affairs. Presently the female made quite a long flight to a tree
by the roadside. I could not tell how the male knew she had flown
and what course she had taken, as he was hidden from her amid the
thick currant-bushes; but he did know, and soon followed after in
his curious exaggerated undulatory manner of flight. I have
little doubt that his suit was finally successful.

I watch these woodpeckers daily to see if I can solve the mystery
as to how they hop up and down the trunks and branches without
falling away from them when they let go their hold. They come
down a limb or trunk backward by a series of little hops, moving
both feet together. If the limb is at an angle to the tree and
they are on the under side of it, they do not fall away from it
to get a new hold an inch or half inch farther down. They are held
to it as steel to a magnet. Both tail and head are involved in the
feat. At the instant of making the hop the head is thrown in and
the tail thrown out, but the exact mechanics of it I cannot
penetrate. Philosophers do not yet know how a backward-falling cat
turns in the air, but turn she does. It may be that the woodpecker
never quite relaxes his hold, though to my eye he appears to do so.

Birds nearly always pass the night in such places as they select
for their nests,--ground-builders upon the ground, tree-builders
upon trees. I have seen an oriole ensconce himself for the night
amid the thick cluster of leaves on the end of a maple branch,
where soon after his mate built her nest.

My chickadees, true to this rule, pass the arctic winter nights
in little cavities in the trunks of trees like the woodpeckers.
One cold day, about four o'clock, while it was snowing and
blowing, I heard, as I was unharnessing my horse near the old
apple-tree, the sharp, chiding note of a chickadee. On looking
for the bird I failed to see him. Suspecting the true cause of
his sudden disappearance, I took a pole and touched a limb that
had an opening in its end where the wrens had the past season had
a nest. As I did so, out came the chickadee and scolded sharply.
The storm and the cold had driven him early to his chamber. The
snow buntings are said to plunge into the snow-banks and pass the
night there. We know the ruffed grouse does this.




IX

BIRD-NESTING TIME


The other day I sat for an hour watching a pair of wood thrushes
engaged in building their nest near "Slabsides." I say a pair,
though the female really did all the work. The male hung around
and was evidently an interested spectator of the proceeding. The
mother bird was very busy bringing and placing the material,
consisting mainly of dry maple leaves which the winter had made
thin and soft, and which were strewn over the ground all about.
How pretty she looked, running over the ground, now in shade, now
in sunshine, searching for the leaves that were just to her
fancy! Sometimes she would seize two or more and with a quick,
soft flight bear them to the fork of the little maple sapling.
Every five or six minutes during her absence, the male would come
and inspect her work. He would look it over, arrange a leaf or
two with his beak, and then go his way. Twice he sat down in the
nest and worked his feet and pressed it with his breast, as if
shaping it. When the female found him there on her return, he
quickly got out of her way.

But he brought no material, he did no needful thing, he was a
bird of leisure. The female did all the drudgery, and with what
an air of grace and ease she did it! So soft of wing, so trim of
form, so pretty of pose, and so gentle in every movement! It was
evidently no drudgery to her; the material was handy, and the
task one of love. All the behavior of the wood thrush affects one
like music; it is melody to the eye as the song is to the ear; it
is visible harmony. This bird cannot do an ungraceful thing. It
has the bearing of a bird of fine breeding. Its cousin the robin
is much more masculine and plebeian, harsher in voice, and ruder
in manners. The wood thrush is urban and suggests sylvan halls
and courtly companions. Softness, gentleness, composure,
characterize every movement. In only a few instances among our
birds does the male assist in nest-building. He is usually only a
gratuitous superintendent of the work. The male oriole visits the
half-finished structure of his mate, looks it over, tugs at the
strings now and then as if to try them, and, I suppose, has his
own opinion about the work, but I have never seen him actually
lend a hand and bring a string or a hair. If I belonged to our
sentimental school of nature writers I might say that he is too
proud, that it is against the traditions of his race and family;
but probably the truth is that he doesn't know how; that the
nest-building instinct is less active in him than in his mate;
that he is not impelled by the same necessity. It is easy to be
seen how important it is that the nesting instinct should be
strong in the female, whether it is or not in the male. The male
may be cut off and yet the nest be built and the family reared.
Among the rodents I fancy the nest is always built by the female.

Whatever the explanation, the mother bird is really the head of
the family; she is the most active in nest-building, and in most
cases in the care of the young; and among birds of prey, as among
insects, the female is the larger and the more powerful.

The wood thrush whose nest-building I have just described, laid
only one egg, and an abnormal-looking egg at that--very long and
both ends of the same size. But to my surprise out of the
abnormal-looking egg came in due time a normal-looking chick
which grew to birdhood without any mishaps. The late, cold season
and the consequent scarcity of food was undoubtedly the cause of
so small a family.

Another pair of wood thrushes built a nest on the low branch of
a maple by the roadside, where I had it under daily observation.
This nest presently held three eggs, two of which hatched in due
time, and for a few days the young seemed to prosper. Then one
morning, I noticed the mother bird sitting in a silent,
meditative way on the edge of the nest. As she made no move
during the minute or two while I watched her, I drew near to see
what was the matter. I found one of the young birds in a state of
utter collapse; it was cold and all but lifeless. The next
morning I found the bird again sitting motionless on the rim of
the nest and gazing into it. I found one of the birds dead and
the other nearly so. What had brought about the disaster I could
not tell; no cause was apparent. I at first suspected vermin, but
could detect none. The silent, baffled look of the mother bird I
shall not soon forget. There was no demonstration of grief or
alarm; only a brooding, puzzled look.

I once witnessed similar behavior on the part of a pair of
bluebirds that were rearing a brood in a box on a grape post near
my study. One day I chanced to observe one of the parent birds at
the entrance of the nest, gazing long and intently in. In the
course of the day I saw this act several times, and in no case
did the bird enter the box with food as it had been doing. Then I
investigated and found the nearly fledged birds all dead. On
removing them I found the nest infested with many dark,
tough-skinned, very active worms or grubs nearly an inch long,
that had apparently sucked the blood out of the bodies of the
fledglings. They were probably the larvæ of some species of
beetle unknown to me. The parent birds had looked on and seen
their young destroyed, and made no effort to free the nest of
their enemy. Or probably they had not suspected what was going
on, or did not understand it if they beheld it. Their instincts
were not on the alert for an enemy so subtle, and one springing
up in the nest itself. Any visible danger from without alarmed
them instantly, but here was a new foe that doubtless they had
never before had to cope with.

The oriole in her nest-building seems more fickle than most other
birds. I have known orioles several times to begin a nest and
then leave it and go elsewhere. Last year one started a nest in
an oak near my study, then after a few days of hesitating labor
left it and selected the traditional site of her race, the
pendent branch of an elm by the roadside. This time she behaved
like a wise bird and came back for some of the material of the
abandoned nest. She had attached a single piece of twine to the
oak branch, and this she could not leave behind; twine was too
useful and too hard to get. So I saw her tugging at this string
till she loosened it, then flew toward the elm with it trailing
in the air behind her. I could but smile at her thrift. The
second nest she completed and occupied and doubtless found her
pendent-nest instinct fully satisfied by the high swaying elm
branch.

One of our prettiest nest-builders is the junco or snowbird; in
fact, it builds the prettiest nest to be found upon the ground,
I think--more massive and finely moulded and finished than that
of the song sparrow. I find it only in the Catskills, or on
their borders, often in a mossy bank by the roadside, in the woods,
or on their threshold. With what delicate and consummate art it
is insinuated into the wild scene, like some shy thing that grew
there, visible, yet hidden by its perfect fitness and harmony with
its surroundings. The mother bird darts out but a few yards from
you as you drive or walk along, but your eye is baffled for some
moments before you have her secret. Such a keen, feather-edged,
not to say spiteful little body, with the emphasis of those two
pairs of white quills in her tail given to every movement, and yet,
a less crabbed, less hasty nest, softer and more suggestive of shy
sylvan ways, than is hers, would be hard to find.

One day I was walking along the grassy borders of a beech and
maple wood with a friend when, as we came to a little low mound
of moss and grass, scarcely a foot high, I said, "This is just
the spot for a junco's nest," and as I stooped down to examine
it, out flew the bird. I had divined better than I knew. What a
pretty secret that little footstool of moss and grass-covered
earth held! How exquisite the nest, how exquisite the place, how
choice and harmonious the whole scene! How could these eggs long
escape the prowling foxes, skunks, coons, the sharp-eyed crows,
the searching mice and squirrels? They did not escape; in a day
or two they were gone.

Another junco's nest beside a Catskill trout stream sticks in my
memory. It was in an open grassy place amid the trees and bushes
near the highway. There were ladies in our trouting party and I
called them to come and see the treasure I had found.

"Where is it?" one of them said, as she stopped and looked around
a few paces from me.

"It is within six feet of you," I replied. She looked about,
incredulous, as it seemed an unlikely place for a nest of any
sort, so open was it, and so easily swept by the first glance.

As she stepped along, perplexed, I said, "Now it is within one
yard of you." She thought I was joking; but stooping down,
determined not to be baffled, she espied it sheltered by a thin,
mossy stone that stood up seven or eight inches above the turf,
tilted at an angle of about that of one side of a house-roof.
Under this the nest was tucked, sheltered from the sun and rain,
and hidden from all but the sharpest eye.




X

A BREATH OF APRIL


I

It would not be easy to say which is our finest or most beautiful
wild flower, but certainly the most poetic and the best beloved
is the arbutus. So early, so lowly, so secretive there in the
moss and dry leaves, so fragrant, tinged with the hues of youth
and health, so hardy and homelike, it touches the heart as no
other does.

April's flower offers the first honey to the bee and the first
fragrance to the breeze. Modest, exquisite, loving the evergreens,
loving the rocks, untamable, it is the very spirit and breath of
the woods. Trailing, creeping over the ground, hiding its beauty
under withered leaves, stiff and hard in foliage, but in flower
like the cheek of a maiden.

One may brush away the April snow and find this finer snow
beneath it. Oh, the arbutus days, what memories and longings they
awaken! In this latitude they can hardly be looked for before
April, and some seasons not till the latter days of the month.
The first real warmth, the first tender skies, the first fragrant
showers--the woods are flooded with sunlight, and the dry leaves
and the leaf-mould emit a pleasant odor. One kneels down or lies
down beside a patch of the trailing vine, he brushes away the
leaves, he lifts up the blossoming sprays and examines and
admires them at leisure; some are white, some are white and pink,
a few are deep pink. It is enough to bask there in the sunlight
on the ground beside them, drinking in their odor, feasting the
eye on their tints and forms, hearing the April breezes sigh and
murmur in the pines or hemlocks near you, living in a present
fragrant with the memory of other days. Lying there, half
dreaming, half observing, if you are not in communion with the
very soul of spring, then there is a want of soul in you. You may
hear the first swallow twittering from the sky above you, or the
first mellow drum of the grouse come up from the woods below or
from the ridge opposite. The bee is abroad in the air, finding
her first honey in the flower by your side and her first pollen
in the pussy-willows by the watercourses below you. The tender,
plaintive love-note of the chickadee is heard here and there in
the woods. He utters it while busy on the catkins of the poplars,
from which he seems to be extracting some kind of food. Hawks are
screaming high in the air above the woods; the plow is just
tasting the first earth in the rye or corn stubble (and it tastes
good). The earth looks good, it smells good, it is good. By the
creek in the woods you hear the first water-thrush--a short,
bright, ringing, hurried song. If you approach, the bird flies
swiftly up or down the creek, uttering an emphatic "chip, chip."

In wild, delicate beauty we have flowers that far surpass the
arbutus: the columbine, for instance, jetting out of a seam in a
gray ledge of rock, its many crimson and flame-colored flowers
shaking in the breeze; but it is mostly for the eye. The
spring-beauty, the painted trillium, the fringed polygala, the
showy lady's-slipper, are all more striking to look upon, but
they do not quite touch the heart; they lack the soul that
perfume suggests. Their charms do not abide with you as do those
of the arbutus.


II

These still, hazy, brooding mid-April mornings, when the farmer
first starts afield with his plow, when his boys gather the
buckets in the sugar-bush, when the high-hole calls long and loud
through the hazy distance, when the meadowlark sends up her
clear, silvery shaft of sound from the meadow, when the bush
sparrow trills in the orchard, when the soft maples look red
against the wood, or their fallen bloom flecks the drying mud in
the road,--such mornings are about the most exciting and
suggestive of the whole year. How good the fields look, how good
the freshly turned earth looks!--one could almost eat it as does
the horse;--the stable manure just being drawn out and scattered
looks good and smells good; every farmer's house and barn
looks inviting; the children on the way to school with their
dinner-pails in their hands--how they open a door into the past
for you! Sometimes they have sprays of arbutus in their
buttonholes, or bunches of hepatica. The partridge is drumming in
the woods, and the woodpeckers are drumming on dry limbs.

The day is veiled, but we catch such glimpses through the veil.
The bees are getting pollen from the pussy-willows and soft
maples, and the first honey from the arbutus.

It is at this time that the fruit and seed catalogues are
interesting reading, and that the cuts of farm implements have a
new fascination. The soil calls to one. All over the country,
people are responding to the call, and are buying farms and
moving upon them. My father and mother moved upon their farm in
the spring of 1828; I moved here upon mine in March, 1874.

I see the farmers, now going along their stone fences and
replacing the stones that the frost or the sheep and cattle have
thrown off, and here and there laying up a bit of wall that has
tumbled down.

There is rare music now in the unmusical call of the
ph[oe]be-bird--it is so suggestive.

The drying road appeals to one as it never does at any other
season. When I was a farm-boy, it was about this time that I used
to get out of my boots for half an hour and let my bare feet feel
the ground beneath them once more. There was a smooth, dry, level
place in the road near home, and along this I used to run, and
exult in that sense of lightfootedness which is so keen at such
times. What a feeling of freedom, of emancipation, and of joy in
the returning spring I used to experience in those warm April
twilights!

I think every man whose youth was spent on the farm, whatever his
life since, must have moments at this season when he longs to go
back to the soil. How its sounds, its odors, its occupations, its
associations, come back to him! Would he not like to return again
to help rake up the litter of straw and stalks about the barn, or
about the stack on the hill where the grass is starting? Would he
not like to help pick the stone from the meadow, or mend the
brush fence on the mountain where the sheep roam, or hunt up old
Brindle's calf in the woods, or gather oven-wood for his mother
to start again the big brick oven with its dozen loaves of rye
bread, or see the plow crowding the lingering snow-banks on the
side-hill, or help his father break and swingle and hatchel the
flax in the barnyard?

When I see a farm advertised for rent or for sale in the spring,
I want to go at once and look it over. All the particulars
interest me--so many acres of meadow-land, so many of woodland,
so many of pasture--the garden, the orchard, the outbuildings,
the springs, the creek--I see them all, and am already half in
possession.

Even Thoreau felt this attraction, and recorded in his Journal:
"I know of no more pleasing employment than to ride about the
country with a companion very early in the spring, looking at
farms with a view to purchasing, if not paying for them."

Blessed is the man who loves the soil!




XI

THE WOODCOCK'S EVENING HYMN


The twilight flight song of the woodcock is one of the most
curious and tantalizing yet interesting bird songs we have. I
fancy that the persons who hear and recognize it in the April or
May twilight are few and far between. I myself have heard it only
on three occasions--one season in late March, one season in
April, and the last time in the middle of May. It is a voice of
ecstatic song coming down from the upper air and through the mist
and the darkness--the spirit of the swamp and the marsh climbing
heavenward and pouring out its joy in a wild burst of lyric
melody; a haunter of the muck and a prober of the mud suddenly
transformed into a bird that soars and circles and warbles like a
lark hidden or half hidden in the depths of the twilight sky. The
passion of the spring has few more pleasing exemplars. The
madness of the season, the abandon of the mating instinct, is in
every move and note. Ordinarily the woodcock is a very dull,
stupid bird, with a look almost idiotic, and is seldom seen
except by the sportsman or the tramper along marshy brooks. But
for a brief season in his life he is an inspired creature, a
winged song that baffles the eye and thrills the ear from the
mystic regions of the upper air.

When I last heard it, I was with a companion, and our attention
was arrested, as we were skirting the edge of a sloping, rather
marshy, bowlder-strewn field, by the "zeep," "zeep," which the
bird utters on the ground, preliminary to its lark-like flight.
We paused and listened. The light of day was fast failing; a
faint murmur went up from the fields below us that defined itself
now and then in the good-night song of some bird. Now it was the
lullaby of the song sparrow or the swamp sparrow. Once the
tender, ringing, infantile voice of the bush sparrow stood out
vividly for a moment on that great background of silence. "Zeep,"
"zeep," came out of the dimness six or eight rods away. Presently
there was a faint, rapid whistling of wings, and my companion
said: "There, he is up." The ear could trace his flight, but not
the eye. In less than a minute the straining ear failed to catch
any sound, and we knew he had reached his climax and was
circling. Once we distinctly saw him whirling far above us. Then
he was lost in the obscurity, and in a few seconds there rained
down upon us the notes of his ecstatic song--a novel kind of
hurried, chirping, smacking warble. It was very brief, and when
it ceased, we knew the bird was dropping plummet-like to the
earth. In half a minute or less his "zeep," "zeep," came up again
from the ground. In two or three minutes he repeated his flight
and song, and thus kept it up during the half-hour or more that
we remained to listen: now a harsh plaint out of the obscurity
upon the ground; then a jubilant strain from out the obscurity
of the air above. His mate was probably somewhere within
earshot, and we wondered just how much interest she took in the
performance. Was it all for her benefit, or inspired by her
presence? I think, rather, it was inspired by the May night, by
the springing grass, by the unfolding leaves, by the apple bloom,
by the passion of joy and love that thrills through nature at
this season. An hour or two before, we had seen the bobolinks in
the meadow beating the air with the same excited wing and
overflowing with the same ecstasy of song, but their demure,
retiring, and indifferent mates were nowhere to be seen. It would
seem as if the male bird sang, not to win his mate, but to
celebrate the winning, to invoke the young who are not yet born,
and to express the joy of love which is at the heart of Nature.

When I reached home, I went over the fourteen volumes of
Thoreau's Journal to see if he had made any record of having
heard the "woodcock's evening hymn," as Emerson calls it. He had
not. Evidently he never heard it, which is the more surprising as
he was abroad in the fields and marshes and woods at almost all
hours in the twenty-four and in all seasons and weathers, making
it the business of his life to see and record what was going on
in nature.

Thoreau's eye was much more reliable than his ear. He saw
straight, but did not always hear straight. For instance, he
seems always to have confounded the song of the hermit thrush
with that of the wood thrush. He records having heard the latter
even in April, but never the former. In the Maine woods and on
Monadnock it is always the wood thrush which he hears, and never
the hermit.

But if Thoreau's ear was sometimes at fault, I do not recall that
his eye ever was, while his mind was always honest. He had an
instinct for the truth, and while we may admit that the truth he
was in quest of in nature was not always scientific truth, or the
truth of natural history, but was often the truth of the poet and
the mystic, yet he was very careful about his facts; he liked to
be able to make an exact statement, to clinch his observations by
going again and again to the spot. He never taxes your credulity.
He had never been bitten by the mad dog of sensationalism that
has bitten certain of our later nature writers.

Thoreau made no effort to humanize the animals. What he aimed
mainly to do was to invest his account of them with literary
charm, not by imputing to them impossible things, but by
describing them in a way impossible to a less poetic nature. The
novel and the surprising are not in the act of the bird or beast
itself, but in Thoreau's way of telling what it did. To draw upon
your imagination for your facts is one thing; to draw upon your
imagination in describing what you see is quite another. The new
school of nature writers will afford many samples of the former
method; read Thoreau's description of the wood thrush's song or
the bobolink's song, or his account of wild apples, or of his
life at Walden Pond, or almost any other bit of his writing, for
a sample of the latter. In his best work he uses language in the
imaginative way of the poet.

Literature and science do not differ in matters of fact, but in
spirit and method. There is no live literature without a play of
personality, and there is no exact science without the clear,
white light of the understanding. What we want, and have a right
to expect, of the literary naturalist is that his statement shall
have both truth and charm, but we do not want the charm at the
expense of the truth. I may invest the commonest fact I observe
in the fields or by the roadside with the air of romance, if I
can, but I am not to put the romance in place of the fact. If you
romance about the animals, you must do so unequivocally, as
Kipling does and as Æsop did; the fiction must declare itself at
once, or the work is vicious. To make literature out of natural
history observation is not to pervert or distort the facts, or to
draw the long bow at all; it is to see the facts in their true
relations and proportions and with honest emotion.

Truth of seeing and truth of feeling are the main requisite: add
truth of style, and the thing is done.




XII

THE COMING OF SUMMER


Who shall say when one season ends and another begins? Only the
almanac-makers can fix these dates. It is like saying when
babyhood ends and childhood begins, or when childhood ends and
youth begins. To me spring begins when the catkins on the alders
and the pussy-willows begin to swell; when the ice breaks up on
the river and the first sea-gulls come prospecting northward.
Whatever the date--the first or the middle or the last of
March--when these signs appear, then I know spring is at hand.
Her first birds--the bluebird, the song sparrow, the robin, the
red-shouldered starling--are here or soon will be. The crows have
a more confident caw, the sap begins to start in the sugar maple,
the tiny boom of the first bee is heard, the downy woodpecker
begins his resonant tat, tat, tat, on the dry limbs, and the
cattle in the barnyard low long and loud with wistful looks
toward the fields.

The first hint of summer comes when the trees are fully fledged
and the nymph Shadow is born. See her cool circles again beneath
the trees in the field, or her deeper and cooler retreats in the
woods. On the slopes, on the opposite side of the river, there
have been for months under the morning and noon sun only slight
shadow tracings, a fretwork of shadow lines; but some morning in
May I look across and see solid masses of shade falling from the
trees athwart the sloping turf. How the eye revels in them! The
trees are again clothed and in their right minds; myriad leaves
rustle in promise of the coming festival. Now the trees are
sentient beings; they have thoughts and fancies; they stir with
emotion; they converse together; they whisper or dream in the
twilight; they struggle and wrestle with the storm.

    "Caught and cuff'd by the gale,"

Tennyson says.

Summer always comes in the person of June, with a bunch of
daisies on her breast and clover blossoms in her hands. A new
chapter in the season is opened when these flowers appear. One
says to himself, "Well, I have lived to see the daisies again and
to smell the red clover." One plucks the first blossoms tenderly
and caressingly. What memories are stirred in the mind by the
fragrance of the one and the youthful face of the other! There is
nothing else like that smell of the clover: it is the maidenly
breath of summer; it suggests all fresh, buxom, rural things. A
field of ruddy, blooming clover, dashed or sprinkled here and
there with the snow-white of the daisies; its breath drifts into
the road when you are passing; you hear the boom of bees, the
voice of bobolinks, the twitter of swallows, the whistle of
woodchucks; you smell wild strawberries; you see the cattle upon
the hills; you see your youth, the youth of a happy farm-boy,
rise before you. In Kentucky I once saw two fields, of one
hundred acres each, all ruddy with blooming clover--perfume for a
whole county.

The blooming orchards are the glory of May, the blooming
clover-fields the distinction of June. Other characteristic June
perfumes come from the honey-locusts and the blooming grapevines.
At times and in certain localities the air at night and morning
is heavy with the breath of the former, and along the lanes and
roadsides we inhale the delicate fragrance of the wild grape. The
early grasses, too, with their frostlike bloom, contribute
something very welcome to the breath of June.

Nearly every season I note what I call the bridal day of
summer--a white, lucid, shining day, with a delicate veil of mist
softening all outlines. How the river dances and sparkles; how
the new leaves of all the trees shine under the sun; the air has
a soft lustre; there is a haze, it is not blue, but a kind of
shining, diffused nimbus. No clouds, the sky a bluish white, very
soft and delicate. It is the nuptial day of the season; the sun
fairly takes the earth to be his own, for better or for worse, on
such a day, and what marriages there are going on all about us:
the marriages of the flowers, of the bees, of the birds.
Everything suggests life, love, fruition. These bridal days are
often repeated; the serenity and equipoise of the elements
combine. They were such days as these that the poet Lowell had in
mind when he exclaimed, "What is so rare as a day in June?" Here
is the record of such a day, June 1, 1883: "Day perfect in
temper, in mood, in everything. Foliage all out except on
button-balls and celtis, and putting on its dark green summer
color, solid shadows under the trees, and stretching down the
slopes. A few indolent summer clouds here and there. A day of
gently rustling and curtsying leaves, when the breeze almost
seems to blow upward. The fields of full-grown, nodding rye
slowly stir and sway like vast assemblages of people. How the
chimney swallows chipper as they sweep past! The vireo's cheerful
warble echoes in the leafy maples; the branches of the Norway
spruce and the hemlocks have gotten themselves new light green
tips; the dandelion's spheres of ethereal down rise above the
grass: and now and then one of them suddenly goes down: the
little chippy, or social sparrow, has thrown itself upon the
frail stalk and brought it to the ground, to feed upon its
seeds; here it gets the first fruits of the season. The first red
and white clover heads have just opened, the yellow rock-rose
and the sweet viburnum are in bloom; the bird chorus is still
full and animated; the keys of the red maple strew the ground,
and the cotton of the early everlasting drifts upon the air."
For several days there was but little change. "Getting toward
the high tide of summer. The air well warmed up, Nature in her
jocund mood, still, all leaf and sap. The days are idyllic. I lie
on my back on the grass in the shade of the house, and look up
to the soft, slowly moving clouds, and to the chimney swallows
disporting themselves up there in the breezy depths. No hardening
in vegetation yet. The moist, hot, fragrant breath of the
fields--mingled odor of blossoming grasses, clover, daisies,
rye--the locust blossoms, dropping. What a humming about the hives;
what freshness in the shade of every tree; what contentment in the
flocks and herds! The springs are yet full and cold; the shaded
watercourses and pond margins begin to draw one." Go to the top
of the hill on such a morning, say by nine o'clock, and see how
unspeakably fresh and full the world looks. The morning shadows
yet linger everywhere, even in the sunshine; a kind of blue
coolness and freshness, the vapor of dew tinting the air.

Heat and moisture, the father and mother of all that lives, when
June has plenty of these, the increase is sure.

Early in June the rye and wheat heads begin to nod; the
motionless stalks have a reflective, meditative air. A little
while ago, when their heads were empty or filled only with chaff
and sap, how straight up they held them! Now that the grain is
forming, they have a sober, thoughtful look. It is one of the
most pleasing spectacles of June, a field of rye gently shaken by
the wind. How the breezes are defined upon its surface--a surface
as sensitive as that of water; how they trip along, little
breezes and big breezes together! Just as this glaucous green
surface of the rye-field bends beneath the light tread of the
winds, so, we are told, the crust of the earth itself bends
beneath the giant strides of the great atmospheric waves.

There is one bird I seldom hear till June, and that is the
cuckoo. Sometimes the last days of May bring him, but oftener it
is June before I hear his note. The cuckoo is the true recluse
among our birds. I doubt if there is any joy in his soul.
"Rain-crow," he is called in some parts of the country. His call
is supposed to bode rain. Why do other birds, the robin for
instance, often make war upon the cuckoo, chasing it from the
vicinity of their nests? There seems to be something about the
cuckoo that makes its position among the birds rather anomalous.
Is it at times a parasitical bird, dropping its eggs into other
birds' nests? Or is there some suggestion of the hawk about our
species as well as about the European? I do not know. I only know
that it seems to be regarded with a suspicious eye by other
birds, and that it wanders about at night in a way that no
respectable bird should. The birds that come in March, as the
bluebird, the robin, the song sparrow, the starling, build in
April; the April birds, such as the brown thrasher, the barn
swallow, the chewink, the water-thrush, the oven-bird, the
chippy, the high-hole, the meadowlark, build in May, while the
May birds, the kingbird, the wood thrush, the oriole, the orchard
starling, and the warblers, build in June. The April nests are
exposed to the most dangers: the storms, the crows, the
squirrels, are all liable to cut them off. The midsummer nests,
like that of the goldfinch and the waxwing, or cedar-bird, are
the safest of all.

In March the door of the seasons first stands ajar a little; in
April it is opened much wider; in May the windows go up also; and
in June the walls are fairly taken down and the genial currents
have free play everywhere. The event of March in the country is
the first good sap day, when the maples thrill with the kindling
warmth; the event of April is the new furrow and the first
seeding;--how ruddy and warm the soil looks just opened to the
sun!--the event of May is the week of orchard bloom; with what
sweet, pensive gladness one walks beneath the pink-white masses,
while long, long thoughts descend upon him! See the impetuous
orioles chase one another amid the branches, shaking down the
fragrant snow. Here the rose-breasted grosbeak is in the blooming
cherry tree, snipping off the blossoms with that heavy beak of
his--a spot of crimson and black half hidden in masses of white
petals. This orchard bloom travels like a wave. In March it is in
the Carolinas; by the middle of April its crest has reached the
Potomac; a week or ten days later it is in New Jersey; then in
May it sweeps through New York and New England; and early in June
it is breaking upon the orchards in Canada. Finally, the event of
June is the fields ruddy with clover and milk-white with daisies.


TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

The "oe" ligature is represented as [oe].

Title page: Changed typo "Cambridg" to "Cambridge."

Table of Contents/Chapter VIII: Retained punctuation error in
chapter title.

Page 18: Added missing period to sentence: "The bear was fussing
... to burying it."

Page 30: Changed typo "sudddenly" to "suddenly."

Pages 31, 79, 95: Retained inconsistent spellings of
highhole/high-hole.

Pages 32 &amp; 58: Retained inconsistent spellings of
treetops/tree-tops.

Page 38: Changed single quote to double quote in sentence: "Here,
Jim, you do this ... thing through".

Chapter XII: Changed typo "IIX" to "XII."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wit of a Duck and Other Papers, by 
John Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIT OF A DUCK AND OTHER PAPERS ***

***** This file should be named 20448-8.txt or 20448-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/4/4/20448/

Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Suzan Flanagan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
