Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Billy Woodchuck, by Arthur Scott Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Tale of Billy Woodchuck

Author: Arthur Scott Bailey

Illustrator: Harry L. Smith

Release Date: April 18, 2008 [EBook #25090]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BILLY WOODCHUCK ***




Produced by Joe Longo, Suzan Flanagan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






     SLEEPY-TIME TALES

            BY

     ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

     THE TALE OF CUFFY BEAR
     THE TALE OF FRISKY SQUIRREL
     THE TALE OF TOMMY FOX
     THE TALE OF FATTY COON
     THE TALE OF BILLY WOODCHUCK
     THE TALE OF JIMMY RABBIT
     THE TALE OF PETER MINK
     THE TALE OF SANDY CHIPMUNK
     THE TALE OF BROWNIE BEAVER
     THE TALE OF PADDY MUSKRAT




     _SLEEPY-TIME TALES_

         THE TALE OF
            BILLY
          WOODCHUCK

             BY

     ARTHUR SCOTT BAILEY

       ILLUSTRATED BY

       HARRY L. SMITH

          NEW YORK
      GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP
         PUBLISHERS




     Copyright, 1916, by
      GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP




CONTENTS


     CHAPTER                           PAGE

     I THE HOUSE IN THE PASTURE           9

     II CALLING NAMES                    14

     III MAGIC                           19

     IV THE GREAT HORNED OWL             24

     V BILLY STANDS GUARD                29

     VI BILLY FORGETS TO WHISTLE         34

     VII GREEN PEAS                      39

     VIII A NEW GAME                     44

     IX WHAT HAPPENED AT AUNT POLLY'S    49

     X UNCLE JERRY CHUCK                 53

     XI BILLY ASKS FOR PAY               58

     XII WHAT JIMMY RABBIT SAW           62

     XIII A JOKE ON UNCLE JERRY          66

     XIV MR. FOX HAS AN IDEA             71

     XV "POP! GOES THE WEASEL!"          76

     XVI THE PLAY-HOUSE                  81

     XVII BILLY BRINGS THE DOCTOR        86

     XVIII A WONDERFUL STICK             91

     XIX MR. WOODCHUCK MOVES             95

     XX THE FAMILY ESCAPES              100

     XXI AT HOME IN THE WOODS           104

     XXII GROUND HOG DAY                108




ILLUSTRATIONS


     BILLY WOODCHUCK OFTEN DUG
     HOLES IN THE PASTURE    _Frontispiece_

                                       PAGE

     "JUST CRAWL INSIDE THAT OLD
     STUMP!" MR. FOX SAID                20

     "WHAT'S THE MATTER?" BILLY
     ASKED                               36

     SHE TOOK HOLD OF BILLY'S EAR        50

     HE PAINTED TWO WHITE STRIPES ON
     UNCLE JERRY'S BACK                  68

     BILLY CARRIED HER BASKET OF HERBS   88




THE TALE OF BILLY WOODCHUCK

I

THE HOUSE IN THE PASTURE


One day, when Johnnie Green tramped over the fields toward the
woods, he did not dream that he walked right over somebody's
bedroom. The snow was deep, for it was midwinter. And as Johnnie
crossed his father's pasture he thought only of the fresh rabbit
tracks that he saw all about him. He had no way of knowing that
beneath the three feet of snow, and as much further below the top
of the ground too, there was a snug, cozy little room, where Mr.
and Mrs. Woodchuck lay sound asleep on a bed of dried grass.

They had been there all winter, asleep like that. And there they
would stay, until spring came and the grass began to grow again.

In summer Johnnie Green was always on the watch for woodchucks. But
now he never gave them a thought. There would be time enough for
that after the snow was gone and the chucks came crawling out of
their underground houses to enjoy the warm sunshine.

Usually it happened in just that way, though there had been years
when Mr. and Mrs. Woodchuck had awakened too soon. And then when
they reached the end of the long tunnel that led from their bedroom
into Farmer Green's pasture they found that they had to dig their
way through a snow-bank before they reached the upper world where
Johnnie Green lived.

But this year their winter's nap came to a close at just the right
time. A whole month had passed since Johnnie walked over their
house. And now when they popped their heads out of their front door
they saw that the snow was all gone and that the sun was shining
brightly. Almost the first thing they did was to nibble at the
tender young grass that grew in their dooryard.

When you stop to remember that neither of them had had so much as a
single mouthful of food since long before Thanksgiving Day you will
understand how hungry they were.

They were very thin, too. But every day they grew a little fatter.
And when at last Johnnie Green passed that way again, late one
afternoon, to drive the cows home to be milked, he thought that
Mrs. Woodchuck looked quite well.

She looked happy, too, just before Johnnie came along. But now she
had a worried air. And it was no wonder, either. For she had five
new children, only a few weeks old, and she was afraid that Johnnie
would take them away from her.

Poor, frightened Mrs. Woodchuck ran round and round her five
youngsters, to keep them all together. And all the time she urged
them nearer and nearer the door of her house.

Johnnie was already late about getting the cows. But he waited to
see what happened. And soon he saw all five of the little chucks
scramble through the doorway. And as soon as the last one was
safely inside the old lady jumped in after her children.

That last one was the biggest of all the young chucks. Perhaps it
was because he always ate twice as much as any of his brothers and
sisters. His mother found him harder to manage, too; and she had to
push him along through the doorway, because he wanted to stop and
snatch a bite from a juicy plantain.

That was Billy Woodchuck--that fat, strong youngster. Even then
Johnnie Green knew that he was going to be a big fellow when he
grew up.




II

CALLING NAMES


Billy Woodchuck grew so fast that he soon looked very much like his
father. Of course, he was still much smaller than Mr. Woodchuck.
But like him, Billy was quite gray; and he had whiskers,
too--though, to be sure, those were black. His eyes also were black
and large and bright. When Billy sat up on his hind legs--as he
often did--he appeared for all the world like a huge squirrel.

In fact, some of Billy's friends remarked how like a squirrel he
looked. And one day when Billy was playing near the edge of the
woods a disagreeable young hedgehog told him that. To tell the
truth, Billy Woodchuck had grown to be the least bit vain. He loved
to gaze upon his bushy tail; and he spent a good deal of time
stroking his whiskers. He hoped that the neighbors had noticed
them.

Now, other people are always quick to see when anyone is silly in
that way. And the young hedgehog thought that Billy Woodchuck
needed taking down a peg. So he said to him:

"Why don't you join the circus?"

"Circus? What's that?" Billy asked.

"A circus is a place where they have all kinds of freaks," the
hedgehog answered with a sly smile--"giants and dwarfs, and thin
people and fat people."

"But I'm not a freak," Billy Woodchuck replied. "Of course, I'm big
for my age. But I'm not a giant."

"Yes, you are," the hedgehog insisted.

"You're a giant squirrel. You look like _him_"--he pointed to a
young fellow called Frisky Squirrel--"only you're ever so much
bigger."

That made Billy Woodchuck very angry. And he began to chatter and
scold.

Wise old Mr. Crow, who sat in a tree nearby, told him to keep his
temper.

"Certainly you are not a squirrel," he said. "It is nonsense to say
that a ground hog is the same as a squirrel----"

Billy Woodchuck's voice broke into a shrill scream. A _ground hog_!
He was terribly angry.

"Why, yes!" Mr. Crow said, nodding his head with a knowing air.
"You're a marmot, you know."

"No, I'm not!" Billy cried. "I'm a woodchuck! That's what I am. And
I'm going home and tell my mother what horrid names you've been
calling me."

Mr. Crow laughed. He said nothing more. But as Billy hurried away
he could hear the young hedgehog calling:

"Ground hog! Marmot! Ground hog! Marmot!" over and over again.

Billy Woodchuck was surprised to see how calm his mother was when
he told her those horrid names. He had rather expected that she
would hurry over to the woods and say a few things to that young
hedgehog, and to old Mr. Crow as well. But she only said:

"Don't be silly! Of course you're a ground hog. You're an American
marmot, too. Though our family has been known in this neighborhood
for many years as the Woodchuck family, you needn't be ashamed of
either of those other names. Isn't 'ground hog' every bit as good a
name as 'hedgehog?'"

Billy Woodchuck began to think it was. And as for "marmot"--that
began to have quite a fine sound in his ears.

"Why can't we change our name to that?" he asked his mother.

But Mrs. Woodchuck shook her head.

"We are plain country people," she said. "Woodchuck is the best
name for us."

[Illustration: "Just Crawl Inside that Old Stump!" Mr. Fox Said]




III

MAGIC


One of the first things Mrs. Woodchuck taught her children was to
beware of dogs and foxes, minks and weasels, skunks and great
horned owls. She often made them say the names of those enemies
over and over again.

For some time Billy Woodchuck was almost afraid to stir out of
doors, for fear he might meet one of those creatures. But at last
as he grew bigger he grew bolder, too. And he began to think that
his mother was just a nervous old lady. Still, when he met a fox
one day at the further end of the pasture Billy was somewhat
frightened. But Mr. Fox seemed very friendly. They talked together
for a while. And then Mr. Fox said:

"Do you like surprises?

"I see you _do_ like them," Mr. Fox continued. "Well, you just
crawl inside that old stump over there. There's a hole in it, as
you see. And in there you'll find something to surprise you." Mr.
Fox stretched himself then. "I must go home now," he said. "I was
out late last night and I feel like taking a nap." So off he
trotted, with never a look behind him.

He was hardly out of sight before Billy Woodchuck hurried to the
old stump and crawled inside. But so far as he could see, it was
quite empty. And he was just about to leave when all at once it
grew dark. That was because Mr. Fox had come back and thrust his
head through the hole.

"Did you find it?" Mr. Fox asked him.

"No!" said Billy in a faint voice.

"Well, well!" said Mr. Fox. "I must be mistaken.... Yes, I know I
am. It was in another stump. Just step outside and I'll show you
which one." The hole was too small for him to squeeze through. If
it had been bigger he would not have bothered to ask Billy to come
out.

Mr. Fox pulled his head back and waited. But Billy Woodchuck did
not appear.

Soon Mr. Fox took another look inside the hollow stump.

"What's the matter?" he asked. "Aren't you coming?"

Then _he_ had a surprise. For Billy Woodchuck was gone. Mr. Fox saw
that the old stump was empty.

He thought that Billy must have used magic, to leave that place and
run away under his very eyes. For you may be sure that Mr. Fox had
kept a close watch on the hole all the time. And he told all his
friends that Billy Woodchuck knew a way to make himself
invisible--a word which means that _nobody could see him_.

Later, when Billy heard what people were saying about him, he only
looked wise and said nothing.

But he had been sadly frightened when Mr. Fox peeped inside the old
stump. And he had made up his mind at once that he would not come
out and be caught. He knew better than that. For now he believed
everything his mother had told him about foxes.

As his bright eyes looked about his prison they soon spied a small
hole which seemed to lead down into the ground. It was large enough
for him to enter. And so he went right down out of sight.

Billy found himself in a long tunnel, which made him think of one
that led to his own home. At the other end of it he came out into
daylight again; and he knew then that it was an old woodchuck's
burrow, in which nobody lived any longer. And it was the back door
that opened into the hollow stump.

Billy Woodchuck hurried home. He thought that Mr. Fox would stay
near the old stump for some time, waiting for him to come out.

Although he had been so frightened, it was a good lesson for him.
For he had learned that no matter how pleasant a fox might be, it
was wise to have nothing to do with him.




IV

THE GREAT HORNED OWL


Billy Woodchuck knew that the Great Horned Owl was a dangerous
person. His mother had often told him that. But he had never yet
seen the Great Horned Owl; and Billy wondered how he should know
him if he should ever happen to meet him. So Billy Woodchuck went
indoors and asked his mother to tell him how the Great Horned Owl
looked.

"He's a big fellow," said Mrs. Woodchuck--"almost as big as the
Great Gray Owl and the Snowy Owl. But you can tell him from them by
his ear-tufts, which stick up from his head like horns."

"What color is he?" Billy inquired.

"Buff and black," Mrs. Woodchuck answered. "He's mottled--that
means about the same as spotted," she explained. "I've heard him
called the 'tiger among birds.' But whether it's because of the
spots, or because he's so fierce, I really don't know."

"Maybe it's _both_," Billy suggested.

"Perhaps!" his mother said. "He has a deep voice," she continued.
"And he calls '_Whoo, hoo-hoo-hoo, whoo, whoo!_' If you heard him
in the woods you might almost think it was old dog Spot barking.
But when he screams"--Mrs. Woodchuck shuddered--"_then_ you'll know
him. For his scream is the most dreadful sound that was ever
heard."

"I wish you would scream like him once," said Billy.

"Bless your heart!" said his mother. "My voice may not be very
sweet, but I never could screech like him."

"Why doesn't Johnnie Green shoot him?" Billy asked. "If he only
would, the Great Horned Owl could never trouble us any more."

"Why, there's more than just _one_!" his mother exclaimed. "When I
say 'the Great Horned Owl,' I don't mean just _one_!"

"Oh!" said Billy. That was different. And then he went out to play
again.

For a long time he couldn't get the Great Horned Owl out of his
mind. Every time he heard the leaves rustle in the trees he jumped
as if forty Great Horned Owls were after him. But since nothing of
the sort happened, at last he forgot all about that danger. It was
late in the afternoon when a horrid call sent him scurrying off:

"_Whoo, hoo-hoo-hoo, whoo, whoo!_"

Billy Woodchuck was sure that the Great Horned Owl had found him at
last. He ran a little way as fast as he could; and then he crouched
down in the grass.

Again came that deep, long-drawn call. It sent Billy off on another
short run.

And after that had happened three times, he was so scared that he
thrust his head under a heap of dried leaves. So long as he
couldn't see the Great Horned Owl, he thought that the Great Horned
Owl couldn't see him.

Then Billy heard his mother's voice. She was calling him. And he
looked up quickly. There she was, right beside him!

"Did you drive him away, Mother?" he asked.

"Whom do you mean?" she inquired.

"Why, the Great Horned Owl!" Billy said.

"I was the only one that called," she told him. "I wanted to see
what you would do. And I must say, you behaved very foolishly.
Don't ever cover up your head like that. First, you must try to get
away. And if you should get caught, remember that your teeth are
sharp. But they won't be of any use to you with your head buried
under a pile of leaves."

Billy Woodchuck saw that he had a great deal to learn. But he was
glad that his mother had taught him that much, though he was
ashamed that he had been so silly.




V

BILLY STANDS GUARD


Old Mr. Woodchuck had a great deal of time on his paws. He was
always telling people how a stone once rolled off a wall on top of
him and hurt his back, so he was not strong enough to do much work.
On pleasant days he was usually to be found sunning himself. And
often when he leaned his lame back against a tree where the sun
fell squarely upon him he would fall asleep and stay there for
hours at a time.

Though he did no work at all, his appetite was always good. And
when he heard that there were ripe apples, or lettuce, or some
other dainty to be had, he always managed to get to the feast about
as early as anybody else. At such times he seemed to forget how
much his back hurt him.

There came a day when Mr. Woodchuck dashed home on a run. At first
his wife thought there must be a fox chasing him. But as soon as he
caught his breath (he was so fat that running always made him
puff), he told Mrs. Woodchuck that a party of his friends was going
to make a raid on Farmer Green's clover-field.

"I'm going with them," he said.

"Do you think you ought to?" she asked. "Isn't it too far? Isn't
your back too lame?"

Mr. Woodchuck clapped his hands to his back and groaned a bit.

"They say there's nothing better for my trouble than tender young
clover-heads," he replied. "So I think I ought to go.... What I
came home for is this: We want some spry young fellow to come along
with us and be a sentinel. And I'm going to take Billy. He's old
enough now to make himself of some use."

"I don't want him to go," Mrs. Woodchuck said. "He's only a child."

"He has ears, hasn't he? And eyes?" her husband replied. "It's time
he helped me a little, after all I've done for him."

Billy Woodchuck was sure that he wanted to go. He was listening to
every word.

"What's a sentinel?" he asked.

"A sentinel is a guard," his father told him. "It is his duty to
sit upon a knoll and watch for men and dogs, while his friends eat
the clover. And if he sees or hears a man or a dog--or any other
enemy--he whistles as loud as he can. That's the danger signal. And
just as soon as they hear it, all the other chucks run away."

"Please let me go, Mother!" Billy begged.

"It's very dangerous," Mrs. Woodchuck objected.

"No danger at all!" Mr. Woodchuck said. "Come on!"

And off they went, though Mrs. Woodchuck was far from pleased.

Mr. Woodchuck hurried over to a big oak, where his friends were
waiting for him. There were almost a dozen of them--fat, elderly
gentlemen. But they were very spry about reaching the clover-field.

Billy felt proud as a peacock when they left him alone on a knoll
at the edge of the clover-patch and told him to keep a sharp ear
out.

"And remember! At the first sign of danger, you must give a loud,
shrill whistle," his father warned him. Then Mr. Woodchuck hurried
away.

Billy could see his father and the others eating clover-tops as
fast as they could pull them off. And he soon began to think that
they were having more fun than he was. He grew tired of sitting
still in one place. And just a little distance away he noticed a
clump of fine clover. As the tops waved gently in the breeze they
seemed to beckon to him.

Soon Billy was eating clover, too. And it was so good that he
forgot all about being a sentinel. He forgot all about listening
for danger. And then all at once he heard a cry:

"Sick him, Spot!"

It was Johnnie Green calling to his dog.




VI

BILLY FORGETS TO WHISTLE


When Billy Woodchuck turned around he saw that dog Spot was coming
straight toward him. Billy dropped the big clover-top he was just
cramming into his mouth; and he ran as fast as he could go for a
little way. Then he stopped and crouched low in the thick clover.
But old Spot came bounding after him.

Again Billy made a quick dash. Again he stopped to hide. And this
time what should he see right in front of him but the door of an
old woodchuck's burrow! He whisked inside it in a hurry and plunged
headlong down to the long tunnel, where he knew he was safe. Above
him he could hear old Spot barking, and Johnnie Green talking. But
he was no longer afraid.

[Illustration: "What's the Matter?" Billy Asked]

Then suddenly Billy remembered that he was a sentinel. And he had
forgotten to whistle! He had forgotten to warn his father and his
friends that they were in danger!

Billy Woodchuck wondered what would happen to them. Though Spot
soon stopped barking, Billy did not dare leave his hiding place. He
only hoped that the old chucks had heard the noise and had run away
in time. Of course, he would be very sorry if any of them should
get caught--especially his father. And yet the more he thought, the
surer he was that if his father reached home the old gentleman
would be very angry. No matter what happened, Billy Woodchuck saw
that he was in great trouble.

It was almost dark when Billy at last left the old burrow and stole
home. Even before he had reached the end of the long tunnel he
could hear a loud groaning in the family bedroom beyond.

It was his father. And as Billy slipped inside the chamber he saw
that his mother was bending over Mr. Woodchuck and trying to quiet
him.

"What's the matter?" Billy asked.

And at that Mr. Woodchuck sprang to his feet. But his wife made him
lie down again. And she seemed pleased to see her son once more.

"Your father has been in a fight," Mrs. Woodchuck said. "When the
dog chased him he ran into an old woodchuck's burrow."

"That's just what I did, too!" Billy exclaimed.

"Yes; but there was a weasel in the one in which your father hid,"
his mother explained. "And your poor father's nose is badly
bitten."

"It's all _his_ fault," Mr. Woodchuck said, meaning Billy, of
course. "He was a sentinel--and he ran away without warning us."

"I didn't have time," Billy whimpered.

"If he were a soldier, he would be shot," his father said, crossly.

Mrs. Woodchuck told her husband that he had better try to go to
sleep.

"I said that Billy was too young to take to the clover field," she
reminded him.

Mr. Woodchuck groaned again.

"Does your nose still pain you?" she asked.

"It's my back," he answered. "I am afraid I hurt it again. And I
don't suppose I shall be able to do another stroke of work all the
rest of the summer."

Somehow, that did not seem to worry Mrs. Woodchuck at all. To tell
the truth, she knew very well that her husband was lazy.

"I shall punish this boy to-morrow--if my back is strong enough,"
Mr. Woodchuck said.

But the next day Mr. Woodchuck was so busy sunning himself that he
never found time to punish Billy after all.




VII

GREEN PEAS


In Farmer Green's garden there were many things that Billy
Woodchuck liked to eat. It seemed to him that every time he stole
down there he found some new vegetable that was nicer than any he
had tasted before. And one day he came upon something that was far
sweeter and juicier than anything he had ever eaten.

Farmer Green's peas were just ready to be picked. Billy Woodchuck
did not know what they were called. But that made no difference to
him. He sat up on his hind legs and pulled off the fat pods and ate
the tender green peas greedily.

I should hate to say how long he stayed there. But it was a very
long time. When he reached the garden-patch it had been so early in
the morning that none of Farmer Green's family was astir. The sun
rose while Billy was breakfasting. And after a while a door slammed
now and then. But Billy Woodchuck never heard a sound, though the
farmhouse was not far away. He was having such a good meal that he
forgot everything else.

At last he could eat no more. He hated to stop. But he could not
hold another mouthful. And now, as he looked around, he was
startled to see Farmer Green's hired man walking toward him. The
hired man had a hoe on his shoulder; and he was coming to work in
the garden.

But Billy did not know that. He was sure that the man was after
_him_. So he dropped down on all fours and started to run. He
really did _try_ to run. But to his surprise he could only drag
himself along the ground.

The first thing that came into his head was the thought that he had
been poisoned. He had heard of such things happening. What else
could be the matter? His hind legs seemed too weak to hold up his
body. Yes! As he pulled himself slowly along, his fat stomach
actually dragged on the ground.

Of course, he could not go fast at all. But he managed to reach a
shallow ditch, where he hid and rested for a time, though he
expected any moment that the hired man would pounce on him.

But nothing of the sort happened; though he did hear the hired man
say:

"Well, look at that! What _will_ Mr. Green say when he knows this?"

And that made Billy shiver all over. For he knew exactly what the
hired man meant.

After a while he crept along the ditch. He wanted to get home to
his mother. And at last he reached the pasture, pulled himself
through the long tunnel, and fell in the middle of the chamber
floor and wept.

"Oh, dear!" he cried. "I can't run any more. I'm afraid I can never
run again."

Mrs. Woodchuck took one look at him.

"What have you been eating?" she asked.

"Some little green balls," Billy answered.

"Where have you been eating them?" she inquired. To tell the truth,
she was the least bit worried.

"It was down in Farmer Green's garden," he told her.

"Ah, ha!" said Mrs. Woodchuck. "Green peas!" she said. "Your
father told me this very morning that they were ripe. You ate too
many of them."

"Will I get better?" Billy asked her.

"Yes, indeed!" she replied. "But it's lucky no man came and found
you like that. I don't believe you could ever have got away."

Billy Woodchuck said nothing more just then. But in a little while
he asked his mother another question:

"Is it because they are in Farmer Green's garden that you call them
_green_ peas, Mother?"




VIII

A NEW GAME


Billy Woodchuck and Jimmy Rabbit often played together. Though they
did not look the least bit alike, they agreed almost perfectly in
one thing: they liked the same good things to eat. There was no
place they would rather go than Farmer Green's garden.

But after he had had a bad fright one day, when dog Spot chased him
away from the lettuce-bed, Jimmy Rabbit did not go near the garden
for a long time. But he could not forget the taste of that crisp
lettuce. So one day he said to Billy Woodchuck:

"How would you like to play a new game?"

"What is it?" Billy asked. "If it's fun, of course I'd like it."

"Well--did you ever play beggar?" Jimmy Rabbit asked him.

"No! What's it like?"

"It's like this," Jimmy told him. "You sit up on your hind legs,
hold your hands in front of you, and let your head hang over on one
side. And whenever anybody comes along you say: 'Please give me
something to eat! Nothing has passed these lips for two days!'"

"B-but I've just had a good meal," Billy said. "And that wouldn't
be true."

"Oh--this is just a game," Jimmy Rabbit said. "It's all right. It's
often done. Everybody will understand."

"Well, then--where shall I sit?" Billy Woodchuck asked.

"I'd advise you to go down near Farmer Green's garden," said
Jimmy--"there are so many people passing that way. I'll wait here
for you. And when you get enough food given you, you can bring it
right back here and I'll help you carry it home."

Billy Woodchuck thought that was very kind. So down he went toward
Farmer Green's garden. And near the fence, beside the bridge across
the brook, where the field-people often passed, he sat up just as
Jimmy Rabbit had told him to.

Pretty soon he saw old Aunt Polly Woodchuck come along with a
basketful of goodies which she had gathered in the garden.

"Please, ma'am, I'm hungry," Billy said. "Nothing has passed my
lips for a whole week." He thought "a week" sounded far better than
"two days."

Now, Aunt Polly was a very old lady and almost blind. She could not
see how Billy's fat sides stuck out. And though she stopped and
looked at him closely, she did not know him--for all he was the son
of her own nephew.

"My, my!" she said. "How hungry you must be! Here--you just take
this basket and go right home and have a good meal. I live 'way
over there under the hill. And you can bring my basket home
to-night."

Billy Woodchuck thanked her. He felt somewhat ashamed to take the
peas and lettuce and apples and clover-heads. But he remembered it
was only a _game_. And Jimmy Rabbit had said it was all right.

Old Aunt Polly Woodchuck trudged back to the garden again. And
Billy hurried back to the place where Jimmy Rabbit was waiting.

"See what I've brought!" he said proudly. "Now you take hold of
the other side of the basket and we'll carry it home to my mother."

"I wouldn't do that if I were you," said Jimmy Rabbit.

"Why not?" asked Billy.

"Well--I just wouldn't. I forgot to remember that it's bad luck not
to sit right down and eat whatever's given you like this. And you
don't want to have bad luck."

Billy Woodchuck was sure he didn't.

"All right, then!" said Jimmy Rabbit. "And they say it's bad luck
if you leave a single scrap uneaten. So I'll sit down too, and help
you."

[Illustration: She Took Hold of Billy's Ear]




IX

AT AUNT POLLY'S


After Jimmy Rabbit and Billy Woodchuck had eaten the very last
goody in old Aunt Polly Woodchuck's basket, Jimmy said that he must
hurry away at once.

"Don't you want to go with me while I take her basket home?" Billy
asked him.

"I'd like to; but I can't," said Jimmy. "The basket's light,
anyway. You won't have any trouble carrying it." And that was the
truth. "If you want to play beggar again to-morrow, perhaps I can
meet you here once more," Jimmy added. "I'm always glad to help a
friend, you know." And then he hopped away.

Billy Woodchuck trotted over to Aunt Polly's house under the hill.
He hoped the old lady hadn't reached home yet, for he was afraid
she might know who he was the next time she saw him.

Luckily she had not returned. And Billy left the basket just
outside the door of her sitting-room and was hurrying back through
her neat tunnel, when he heard voices.

And sure enough, as he crawled out of Aunt Polly's front door,
there sat the old lady herself. And with her was Billy's own
mother, who had come over to pay a call upon Aunt Polly and ask
after her rheumatism.

"Well, if here isn't that poor little lad right now!" Aunt Polly
exclaimed, the minute she saw Billy Woodchuck. "He's just after
bringing home my basket, I know." She had been telling Billy's
mother about the starving youngster she had found.

"So this is the young beggar, is it?" Mrs. Woodchuck said. "I must
say he looks very fat for a person who has had nothing to eat for a
week."

Aunt Polly felt of Billy's pudgy sides.

"Dearie me! He doesn't seem thin, exactly," she agreed. "But you
must remember he has just had one good meal."

"No doubt!" said Mrs. Woodchuck. "And it's the fourth, at least,
that he's had to-day."

"You don't say so! You know him, then?" asked Aunt Polly.

"I'm ashamed to say I do," Mrs. Woodchuck answered. "I never
thought I should be the mother of a beggar. But I see that I am. It
can't be helped this time. But I know how to keep it from happening
again." She took hold of Billy's ear. "Come home with me, young
man," she said.

Billy Woodchuck began to whimper.

"It was just a game!" he cried. "We were only playing. We were
having fun."

"_We?_ How many were there of you?" his mother asked.

"Two of us--me and Jimmy Rabbit!"

Mrs. Woodchuck was too upset to notice that Billy said _me_ when he
ought to have said _I_.

"I'd like to have Jimmy Rabbit's ear in my other hand," she told
Aunt Polly.




X

UNCLE JERRY CHUCK


Not only Mr. Woodchuck, but his friends as well, were angry with
Billy, because he forgot to whistle a warning to them, when dog
Spot caught them in the clover-patch. And whenever they met Billy
Woodchuck anywhere they would scold at him, and tell him that he
was a heedless, careless boy.

"It will be a long time before you have another chance to be a
sentinel and listen for danger," Uncle Jerry Chuck told him.

After he heard that, there was nothing that Billy wanted to do so
much as to stand guard again. Before, he had been happy and
contented. But now that he learned that there was something he
mightn't do he knew he should never be satisfied until he did it.

Every day Billy went to one of his father's friends and asked him
if he didn't want somebody to listen for him. But they all told him
that he was a good-for-nothing rascal and bade him be off.

Finally Billy went to Uncle Jerry Chuck's house and fairly begged
the old gentleman to let him do some listening.

The sly old gentleman had been waiting for just that thing. He was
very fond of taking naps in the sunshine and he wanted to find some
youngster like Billy, with sharp ears, to stay near him while he
slept and waken him in case some enemy should see him.

Now, if Uncle Jerry had been willing to pay them, he might have
found plenty of first-class listeners. But he was stingy. He was
always trying to get something for nothing. And now he said to
Billy:

"I'll give you just one more chance. Maybe you learned a lesson
down in the clover-patch. Perhaps you won't forget to remember to
whistle, after what happened that time."

"No, Uncle Jerry!" said Billy Woodchuck. He was very polite. "When
may I begin?" he asked.

"Right now!" Uncle Jerry told him. "Come with me, up on top of the
big rock." And he walked off at once, with Billy at his side.

"But there's nothing for you to eat there," said Billy.

"Eat?" Uncle Jerry exclaimed. "I'm not going to eat. I'm going to
_sleep_."

So Uncle Jerry Chuck went to sleep on top of the big rock. All the
time he slept, Billy Woodchuck sat upon his hind legs and listened
with all his might and main. But his sharp ears caught no hint of
danger.

After a while he began to wish that old Spot would come along--or a
skunk or a fox. For it seemed as if Uncle Jerry never would wake up
again.

Billy wouldn't have minded quite so much, if Uncle Jerry hadn't
snored. But, of course, that made it much harder to listen.

At last Uncle Jerry Chuck opened his eyes and slowly rose to his
feet and stretched himself.

"You've done very well, for a beginner," he told Billy. "Come back
here to-morrow at the same hour and I'll try you again."

Now, Billy Woodchuck had done enough listening to last him for a
long time. But he didn't know just how to tell that to Uncle
Jerry. And almost before he knew it he found himself saying:

"Yes, sir!"




XI

BILLY ASKS FOR PAY


The next day, at the same hour, Uncle Jerry Chuck went to the big
rock. This time he was looking forward to even a longer nap in the
sun than he had had the day before. If Billy Woodchuck was willing
to listen, without pay, Uncle Jerry was more than willing to let
him.

Billy Woodchuck was somewhat late. But he arrived at last.

"You must be more prompt," Uncle Jerry told him, severely. "I have
no time to waste waiting for a young chap like you. When I'm good
enough to let you do my listening, it seems to me you ought to be
on time," he grumbled. That is often the way with people who get
things for nothing. They are very likely to find fault.

Now, Billy Woodchuck had been doing some thinking since the day
before. And while Uncle Jerry was hunting for a soft spot on the
big rock, where he could lie, Billy suddenly surprised him by
saying:

"Don't you think you ought to pay me for listening for you, Uncle
Jerry?"

Uncle Jerry grunted. He was not at all pleased.

"This is not a good time to speak of _pay_," he said. "I am so
sleepy that I can hardly keep my eyes open. However, I'll see what
I can do for you--after I've had my nap."

And then he fell asleep, and snored ever so much louder than he had
the previous day. He slept longer, too. And by the time he
awakened, Billy Woodchuck was quite worn out, and ready to fall
asleep himself.

This time Uncle Jerry did not wait to stretch himself. As soon as
he opened his eyes he leapt to his feet and started off.

"Meet me here to-morrow at the same hour," he ordered.

"But you haven't paid me for to-day!" Billy Woodchuck cried.

Uncle Jerry stopped.

"I declare, I'd forgotten all about that," he said. "I'll tell you
what I'll do.... You know, turn about is fair play. So if you want
to take a nap, you can lie right down here and take it. And I'll do
more for you than you did for me. I'll keep track of the time. And
when the sun gets over the big elm by the brook, I'll wake you up."

Billy Woodchuck agreed. And as soon as he was fast asleep Uncle
Jerry left him. You see, old Uncle Jerry Chuck was a sly old
gentleman. He had said nothing at all about listening for danger.

So Billy Woodchuck slept on.

If the Great Horned Owl had happened along then, he could have
caught Billy without any trouble.

But it was not Mr. Owl who passed that way, before the sun climbed
above the big elm. Though some one did spy Billy, as he lay there
sleeping.

Who do you suppose it was?




XII

WHAT JIMMY RABBIT SAW


It was Jimmy Rabbit who came along and caught sight of Billy
Woodchuck, sound asleep on top of the big rock.

Jimmy was surprised. It seemed to him that it was a very careless
thing to do. And while he was wondering whether he would just waken
Billy, or play some trick on him, he saw Uncle Jerry Chuck come
puffing up the hill and go to Billy and give him a good, hard
shake.

Billy Woodchuck at once jumped up, rubbing his eyes to get the
sleep out of them. And Uncle Jerry started to waddle down the hill.
But before he had gone far he turned around; and Jimmy Rabbit
heard him call:

"Remember! To-morrow at the same hour!"

Jimmy wondered what he meant. He waited till Uncle Jerry was out of
sight and then he stepped out from behind the blackberry bush where
he was hiding and hopped over to the big rock.

"Hello, Billy!" he said. "What's going on to-morrow?"

"I listen, while Uncle Jerry sleeps," Billy explained. "And then,
after he's had his nap, I sleep while he listens."

"Oh, ho!" said Jimmy Rabbit. "And _where_ does he listen--if I may
be so bold as to ask?" So long as he put his questions like that,
Jimmy Rabbit always seemed to think that he could ask anyone
anything he wanted to.

"Why, he listens _here_," said Billy.

"What makes you think so? Did he say he would?"

"Yes--er--n-no! He said he would wake me up at this time," said
Billy. "But, of course, he was right here all the while."

"Of course he was _not_!" said Jimmy. "When I first came along, you
were all alone. And pretty soon I saw Uncle Jerry come up the hill
and shake you. I tell you, it's lucky for you nothing happened,
while you were taking your nap."

Billy Woodchuck saw that he had been tricked. And he was very
angry. He was so angry that he wanted to run straight down to Uncle
Jerry's house and tell him just what he thought about him.

But Jimmy Rabbit said "No!" He knew something better to do than
that. "Let's see----" he said. "Didn't I hear Uncle Jerry mention
something about 'to-morrow at the same hour'?" he asked.

"Y-y-e-s-s!" Billy Woodchuck was so angry that his teeth were
chattering and clattering; and he found it very hard to talk.

"Well, then--you just lie low until to-morrow. Meet him here. Let
him fall asleep. And then we'll teach him a good lesson."

Billy liked that idea. He liked it so well that he could hardly
wait for to-morrow to come.




XIII

A JOKE ON UNCLE JERRY


Well, the third day Uncle Jerry Chuck once more climbed to the top
of the big rock to take his nap in the sun. And this time Billy
Woodchuck was there ahead of him.

"Good!" said Uncle Jerry. "I see you're trying to do better. You're
not late to-day.... Now, keep a sharp ear out while I'm asleep. And
don't forget to give a loud whistle the moment you hear the least
noise that--sounds--like----" He was asleep even before he finished
what he had started to say. And after taking a good look at him,
Billy Woodchuck tiptoed away to a spot where he saw two long ears
sticking out from behind a clump of milkweed.

[Illustration: He Painted Two White Stripes on Uncle Jerry's
Back]

"Is he asleep?" Jimmy Rabbit whispered.

"Yes!" said Billy.

"Then help me carry these pots of paint up where that old fraud
is," said Jimmy Rabbit.

Billy Woodchuck obeyed. There was a pot of black paint and a pot of
white. And besides all that, Jimmy had a whole armful of Indian
paint brush, which grew thick in Farmer Green's pasture. He gave
Billy Woodchuck a brush.

"Now," he whispered, "we'll paint this old fellow black."

Between them they soon covered Uncle Jerry Chuck with a thick coat
of the black paint. And then Jimmy Rabbit stood off and squinted at
the sleeper.

"So far, so good!" he said. "And now for the last touch of all!
This has to be put on with care, so I shall do it myself."

And Billy Woodchuck watched him while he painted two broad, white
stripes the length of Uncle Jerry's back. They began on the top of
his head, so close together that they made just one line, and ended
far apart, on either side of his tail.

"There!" Jimmy Rabbit whispered, when he had finished. "Does he
look like anyone you know?"

"He looks exactly like Henry Skunk's father," said Billy Woodchuck.
And he backed away. He was afraid of the Skunk family. "What are we
going to do now?" Billy asked.

"First of all, we'll hide these pots of paint," said Jimmy. And as
soon as they had done that Jimmy added: "Go up on the rock, whistle
as loud as you can, and then run.... I'm going to hurry down the
hill and see the fun."

Billy Woodchuck did exactly as he was told. And in no time at all
his shrill whistle had awakened Uncle Jerry Chuck.

The old gentleman sprang up. He saw Billy, scurrying toward home.
And without so much as a glance behind him to see what the danger
might be, Uncle Jerry tore down the hill. He didn't know what was
chasing him; but he was sure there was something.

On the way home he met Billy Woodchuck's father. And when Mr.
Woodchuck saw him he fell right over backward, he was so
frightened. For he, too, was afraid of the Skunk family.

Uncle Jerry thought that was queer. But he didn't stop. He ran into
his house. And there another queer thing happened. The moment his
wife caught sight of him she gave a scream and rushed out of the
back door.

And for a long, long time after that there wasn't one of Uncle
Jerry's family or his friends who would have anything to do with
him.

He noticed another strange thing, too. Jimmy Rabbit and Billy
Woodchuck were always following him. And whenever Uncle Jerry
turned around quickly he was sure to catch them laughing.

But whatever the joke was, he never could see it.




XIV

MR. FOX HAS AN IDEA


It was so long since Mr. Fox had tried to catch Billy Woodchuck in
the hollow stump that Billy had begun to forget his fear of that
sly fellow. And so when he met Mr. Fox in the woods one day Billy
did not run as he had often done before. To be sure, he did not go
too near Mr. Fox. And while they talked Billy watched the
sharp-nosed gentleman with one eye; and the other eye he kept on a
hole in the stonewall nearby. If Mr. Fox should come too close,
Billy was ready to dive into that hole, where Mr. Fox could not
reach him.

No one could have been pleasanter than Mr. Fox. "I'm so glad to
meet you!" he said. "You're just the person I want to see. I've
been told you are very musical."

Billy Woodchuck didn't know what he meant. But he did not say so.

"Yes," Mr. Fox went on. "They say you are the best whistler in
Pleasant Valley."

That made Billy Woodchuck feel very proud.

"I _can_ whistle pretty well," he said, throwing out his chest.

"And they tell me your two brothers are almost as good whistlers as
you are--but not _quite_," added Mr. Fox, for he saw that Billy did
not like that so well.

"Oh, they can whistle some. But I can beat them," Billy answered.

"I have an idea," said Mr. Fox. He really had a great many ideas in
his head--more, probably, than any other of the forest-people.
"I'm very fond of music and I want to have a fife-and-drum corps."

"What's that? I never heard of such a thing," exclaimed Billy
Woodchuck.

"Fifes and drums--they make music, you know," Mr. Fox explained.
"Now, everybody knows that old Mother Grouse's sons are famous
drummers."

Billy agreed that that was true. He had often heard the Grouse boys
drumming in the woods.

"I've already spoken to them. And they are asking me every day when
we are going to begin to practise," Mr. Fox continued. "But I
couldn't think of any fifers until I happened to remember about you
and your brothers."

"I don't know how to play a fife," said Billy. "I've never even
seen one."

"Oh, that's nothing! You can hold a stick up to your mouth, and
wriggle your fingers, and whistle. No one will know that you are
not playing a fife. It will sound just the same. And the music will
be just as sweet." Mr. Fox smiled at Billy. And Billy smiled at
him.

"Good!" said Billy. "Will you bring the drummers to my house?"

"Well--no! Not just yet!" said Mr. Fox. "We ought to go off in the
woods, where nobody can hear us, until we learn a tune. Then we can
come and play for your mother. But I wouldn't say anything to her
about the fife-and-drum corps if I were you. Let's surprise her!"

Billy thought that was a good idea.

"Bring your brothers over to my house late this afternoon," Mr. Fox
said. "I'll have the Grouse boys there. And we can begin to learn
to make music at once."

"Who will teach us?" asked Billy. "Do _you_ know how to drum or
whistle?"

"Don't you worry about that!" Mr. Fox answered. "I can teach you a
thing or two." And he hurried away to find Mother Grouse's sons and
tell them the good news.




XV

"POP! GOES THE WEASEL!"


Just as he had promised, Billy Woodchuck led his two brothers to
Mr. Fox's house late in the afternoon, to join the fife-and-drum
corps, and make sweet music.

The Grouse boys--all four of them--were already there and waiting
to begin. And Mr. Fox was all smiles.

"Let's go further into the woods," he said. "I know a fine place,
where we won't be disturbed." He had noticed that old Mr. Crow was
sitting in the top of a tall elm, and he did not care to have the
old gentleman see what was going on.

So they followed Mr. Fox. And after a while he stopped close by a
broad brook. He told Billy and his brothers just where to stand,
and how to hold their short sticks so they would look like fifes.

The Grouse boys perched themselves high up on the trunk of a dead
tree, which had fallen against a big oak and lay slanting between
the oak and the ground.

"Come right down here!" Mr. Fox said to them.

But the Grouse brothers told him that they could drum much better
where they were.

"What tune are we going to learn?" Billy Woodchuck asked.

Mr. Fox thought for a moment. And then he said:

"The first tune will be 'Pop! Goes the Weasel.'" He hummed it to
them. And soon the Grouse boys began to drum; and Billy Woodchuck
and his brothers began to whistle.

Though they played very badly, Mr. Fox declared again and again
that he was much pleased.

"But I seem to be a little too near the music," he said. "I want
you all to face _that_ way," he went on, pointing a paw over his
shoulder. "And please keep on playing while I go off and see how
the tune sounds further away."

So they began to play "Pop! Goes the Weasel," once more, while Mr.
Fox, beating time all the while, backed slowly out of sight in the
direction in which he had pointed.

They played and played. And at last Billy Woodchuck's lips began to
feel very queer, puckered up as they were. And now and then not a
single whistle came from his mouth, though he blew as hard as he
knew how. He was out of breath, too. And so were his brothers.

Billy was wondering why Mr. Fox did not come back, when his sharp
ears caught a faint sound. It was no more than a dry leaf breaking.
Neither you nor I could have heard it.

In spite of what Mr. Fox had said about looking straight ahead,
Billy turned around. And he was always glad, afterward, that he
had. For whom should he see behind him but Mr. Fox, stealing upon
them with a horrid grin on his face!

The music stopped short. With one frightened scream Billy Woodchuck
was off. He plunged into the brook, with his brothers right at his
heels. And in no time at all they had swum across to the other side
and vanished in the thick bushes.

At the water's edge Mr. Fox paused. If there was one thing he
hated, it was getting his feet wet. The brook was too broad for
him to jump; and when at last he found a place where he could cross
by hopping from one stone to another, the Woodchuck boys were
nowhere to be found.

But the Grouse brothers still sat on the dead tree, though they had
moved to its very top; and they had stopped drumming.

"How did the music sound?" one of them asked.

"It was the worst I ever heard," Mr. Fox snarled.

The Grouse brothers snickered. And one of them invited Mr. Fox to
come up where they were.

But he never even thanked them.




XVI

THE PLAY-HOUSE


As Billy Woodchuck grew bigger he was often to be seen digging
holes in the pasture. You might think he was looking for something.
But he was not. He was merely playing at making houses.

First he would dig a slanting hole down into the ground. And then
from the bottom of that he would run a level tunnel. When his
tunnel was as long as he wanted it, he would work his way upward
for a short distance. And there he would make a chamber, much like
the one at home.

Of course, Billy's play-houses were not so big as his mother's
home. The front stairs were shorter, and the hall was not so long,
and the chamber was smaller. But he thought they were wonderful.
And he made up his mind that the next time Johnnie Green or dog
Spot chased him he would run down into one of those play-houses and
hide. Billy hoped that he would be chased soon.

He did not have to wait long. One evening when old Spot had started
the last cow homeward he lingered in the pasture a while. If there
was one thing he liked, it was chasing woodchucks.

When Billy Woodchuck caught sight of Spot, sniffing along the
ground, he climbed up on a hummock, so that Spot could see him, and
gave a loud whistle.

It didn't take old Spot long to see Billy. And as soon as he spied
him he made a dash for him.

That was exactly what Billy Woodchuck wanted. He waited as long as
he dared. And then he made off like a gray streak toward his newest
house.

Old Spot saw his bushy tail disappear through the front door. And
Spot looked down into the darkness and called Billy a few names.

He pawed and scratched at the door, too. But he was no such digger
as Billy Woodchuck. And after a while he grew tired of staying
there and went away.

That night, after Billy Woodchuck went home, he boasted about his
newest play-house.

"It's exactly as good as this one," he bragged. "To-day old Spot
chased me, and I ran into my house and he never touched me. After
this I'm always going to hide there."

Billy's brothers and sisters thought he was very clever. But his
mother said:

"I want to see that play-house. To-morrow you may show it to me."

That pleased Billy. It made him feel prouder than ever. And the
next morning he was up bright and early. Sometimes he was very slow
about dressing, because he stopped to play. And that made him late
to breakfast. But this morning he was even ahead of time.

As soon as Mrs. Woodchuck had finished her meal of plantain leaves,
Billy reminded her that she had promised to look at his play-house.

She followed him through the front door that he had made, walked to
the end of the tunnel, and into the tiny chamber.

Once inside that room Mrs. Woodchuck took one quick look all
around. And then she turned and ran out as fast as her short legs
would carry her, calling all the time to Billy to hurry. When she
reached the open air Mrs. Woodchuck had to sit down and fan
herself, she was so excited.

"Why did you come out so soon--and so fast?" Billy asked her.

"That's nothing but a trap," his mother said. "You haven't built
any back door. And if a weasel or a mink or a snake should come in
after you, there you'd be, with no way to escape.... I haven't had
such a fright for years."

Billy Woodchuck looked foolish. He had never once thought about a
back door. But after that he never forgot to build one. He saw that
a back door was something that every house ought to have.




XVII

BILLY BRINGS THE DOCTOR


Billy Woodchuck was alarmed. His mother had come home very ill. At
least, that was what Billy thought. It was a warm summer's day; but
Mrs. Woodchuck seemed to be freezing with cold. Her teeth chattered
so hard that the sound filled the whole house. And when Billy asked
her what was the matter with her she did not say a word.

Then he was sure she was ill. For she was a great talker. This was
the first time he had ever seen her when she could not speak.

Now, Mr. Woodchuck was not at home. And none of the children knew
what to do. So Billy left the house and hurried over to find Aunt
Polly Woodchuck--an old lady who was a famous herb doctor.
Woodchucks for miles around came to see her when they were not
feeling well. And she would give them a peppermint leaf to chew, or
some tansy, or maybe a drink of catnip tea. And everybody said that
her medicines never did anyone a bit of harm.

Luckily, Billy found Aunt Polly at home. And he quickly told her
about his mother.

"You say her teeth chatter?" the old lady asked.

"Yes, Aunt Polly!"

"Do they make a clattering noise?"

"Yes, Aunt Polly!"

Aunt Polly Woodchuck nodded her head wisely.

"I thought so," she said. "It sounds to me like chills-and-fever.
I'll go right back with you and see what I can do to help her."

So Aunt Polly and Billy started off together. Though he carried her
basket of herbs, they could not go very fast, for the dear old lady
was half blind.

But at last they reached Billy's home. And there they found his
mother, sweeping the floor as spryly as if she had never known a
sick day in her whole life.

"I see you're feeling better," said Aunt Polly. "Your son told me
you were ill and I came right over."

Mrs. Woodchuck thanked her. And then she sent all the children out
to play. As soon as they had left the room she said to Aunt Polly:

"I wasn't ill at all. I am ashamed to say that I was just angry.
And since you are a near relation of ours, I'll tell you the
reason. I'll tell you what happened.

[Illustration: Billy Carried Her Basket of Herbs]

"Yesterday Johnnie Green dropped a big stone through our front
door. It almost filled the end of my hall, so I could hardly
squeeze past it. And this morning I asked Mr. Woodchuck to help me
dig around the stone. But he said his rheumatism was so bad that he
couldn't do a bit of work. And then he went off and stayed away all
the rest of the day.

"After I had done the work myself I went out to get a little fresh
air and a bite to eat. And over in the meadow, what do you suppose
I saw? There was a baseball game going on. And Mr. Woodchuck was
playing so hard that he never noticed me at all.... Do you wonder I
was angry?"

Old Aunt Polly said it was a shame. And she found a bit of celery
in her basket, which she gave to Billy's mother.

"Just eat that!" Aunt Polly said. "It's good for the nerves."

Mrs. Woodchuck thanked her again.

"I wish you could give my husband something that would make him
work," she said.

But for once old Aunt Polly Woodchuck didn't have the right sort of
medicine.

"Laziness," she said, "is terribly hard to cure."




XVIII

A WONDERFUL STICK


Now, Billy Woodchuck knew that he must beware of boys like Johnnie
Green. And more than that, he had learned that boys with sticks are
even worse than boys without them. Still, if he did not let Johnnie
come too near him, there was not much danger.

So he was not at all frightened when he happened to catch sight of
Johnnie Green crossing the pasture with a long stick over his
shoulder. He was so far away that Billy Woodchuck sat up on a
little hummock and watched him.

Pretty soon the boy saw Billy. And the moment he spied him he
stopped and pointed the long stick at the plump young chuck.

That made Billy Woodchuck smile. He was not the least bit afraid.
For if Johnnie Green should come nearer he intended to pop inside
his mother's door.

The next moment Billy Woodchuck heard a sound just above his
head--a sound like the sighing of the wind in the top of a pine
tree. He thought that was very queer, for there was no wind at all
that morning. And there was not a tree near him.

Then it thundered. And yet the sun was shining brightly and there
wasn't a cloud in the sky.

But as he looked once more at Johnnie Green he was astonished to
see a small cloud float from the end of that long stick and lose
itself in the air.

All at once Billy Woodchuck was frightened. He was afraid of
Johnnie Green, for he saw that it was Johnnie who made the wind
blow, and turned loose the thunder and the clouds. He noticed that
Johnnie was doing something to that strange stick; and he expected
that in another minute it would begin to rain. But he didn't wait
to see. He felt that he would be far safer indoors. So he scampered
straight home.

"What are you shaking for?" Mrs. Woodchuck asked, as Billy burst in
upon her.

"I'm frightened," her son told her. "I've just seen Johnnie Green
making thunder and wind and clouds."

"Be careful!" his mother said. "You know you are not allowed to
tell tales."

"But I _did_ see him," Billy insisted. "He pointed a stick at me,
and the wind blew and it thundered; and I saw a little white cloud
come right out of the end of the stick."

It was Mrs. Woodchuck's turn to be upset. And she shook even more
than Billy had as she said:

"My goodness, child! That was a gun! And it's a mercy you weren't
shot. Don't you stir out of this house again to-day--nor _you_, nor
_you_, nor _you_, nor _you_," she repeated, pointing to each of her
other children.

And though Johnnie Green waited for some time, to see if a black
head would not peep out of Mrs. Woodchuck's front door, nothing of
the sort happened until after the sun had set and the cows had all
gone home for the night. And by that time Johnnie Green was eating
his supper.




XIX

MR. WOODCHUCK MOVES


Mr. Woodchuck was annoyed. And he had good reason to be. The
weather was fine and he had planned to spend the whole day sunning
himself on a big rock not far from his own dooryard. But he had
scarcely found a comfortable seat for himself, after finishing his
breakfast, when he caught sight of Farmer Green and his hired man
coming across the fields. They were headed straight for the
pasture. And Mr. Woodchuck began to complain so loudly about his
rest being disturbed, and how mean it was of Farmer Green to come
poking about other people's dooryards, that Mrs. Woodchuck came to
her door to see what had happened.

As soon as she saw those men she called her children all home. It
was too bad. But until the intruders had gone, their underground
house was the best place for the whole Woodchuck family.

Mr. Woodchuck alone lingered in the doorway. He made up his mind
that he would not go inside until he had to, anyhow.

A little later there came a terrible noise like a clap of thunder.
Even in their house down there in the ground Mrs. Woodchuck and her
children felt the walls shake.

"What can have happened?" she asked her husband. He had come in
somewhat out of breath, soon after that frightful sound.

"It seems to be a new kind of gun," he said, "though I didn't
notice that the men brought one with them. It went off close to an
old stump; and you should have seen the wood and dirt fly. The
noise has given me a headache. That is why I came into the house."

Now, Mrs. Woodchuck knew him very well. And though he tried not to
let her know it, she saw that he was scared. But she did not
mention _that_ to him. There were the children, you know. She
didn't want _them_ to be frightened.

Now and then that booming, roaring, thundering sound would burst
upon their ears again. And the earth would rock. Each time that
happened Mrs. Woodchuck would go to her back door, where she could
not be seen easily, and peep out. And what she saw filled her with
fear.

Mr. Woodchuck did not help to make the day any pleasanter, for he
was forever complaining about his lame back. He claimed that he
needed sunshine; and he said that as soon as he could find time he
intended to report Farmer Green to the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals.

"This is almost enough," he said, "to make me move to the West. I
have a cousin who went there years ago. It is a long way from
here--at least a mile the other side of Blue Mountain. Yes! I would
move at once--except that I will _not_ be driven out of my own
house by anyone." He looked so fierce as he said that that Billy
Woodchuck thought there could be no braver person in the whole
world.

Then something happened that made Mr. Woodchuck change his mind
very quickly. A roar ten times louder than any of the others seemed
to split their ears apart. Their house was swept by a great gust
of wind--a thing that had never happened before. And strangest of
all! their chamber became light as day!

That was when Mr. Woodchuck moved. He did not stop to take even a
pocket-handkerchief with him. But then, he left in a great hurry.




XX

THE FAMILY ESCAPES


After that frightful noise, when her house suddenly grew light, and
her husband ran away, Mrs. Woodchuck saw with dismay that there was
a big hole in the ceiling. The earth had split open and the
daylight was streaming in.

Mr. Woodchuck had been gone only a few moments when dog Spot began
to bark. Mrs. Woodchuck could not see him; but she knew his voice
only too well.

She was not quite sure what she ought to do. But there she was,
with her house broken into, and five children on her hands.

Though she was frightened, she was brave just the same. And she had
not the least idea of going anywhere without taking her family with
her.

"Follow me!" she cried. And out of the room she hurried, with her
youngsters close behind her.

Luckily, Mrs. Woodchuck's back door was just out of sight of the
men. They did not see her at all while she waited and counted her
children as they came through the doorway.

They were all there--all five of them. And as soon as she had
counted the fifth one, Mrs. Woodchuck dashed off across the
pasture, in exactly the opposite direction to that in which she
could still hear old Spot barking.

Soon they were in the woods. And Mrs. Woodchuck led the way to an
old empty house, where her grandmother had once lived. It was not
so good a house as the one they had just left. But it was much
better than none at all.

"Mother! What was that dreadful sound?" Billy asked when they had
begun to get over their fright. His ears still rang.

"I'm not sure," said Mrs. Woodchuck. "But it seemed to me that
Farmer Green was shooting away the stumps in the pasture. Perhaps
you didn't know that there was an old stump quite near our bedroom.
And when the gun went off it must have shot straight down into our
house."

"But father said he saw no gun," Billy said.

"Yes, I know he did," Mrs. Woodchuck said. "And neither did I. But
I _smelled powder_. So I can't be far wrong."

And, of course, the good old lady was not. Perhaps you have already
guessed that Farmer Green was blasting away the stumps with
powder. Anyhow, the Woodchuck family had a narrow escape.

And as for Mr. Woodchuck, he was never seen in those parts
afterward. When anyone asked for him, his wife always said that he
had gone on a visit to see his cousin, who lived in the West, and
she really didn't know when he would come back again. "He didn't
tell me that," she would explain, "for he left in a great hurry.
But I am looking for him every day. The house is _so_ quiet without
him."

And that was quite true. For you see, Mr. Woodchuck was always
groaning and complaining about his health.

Perhaps it agreed with him better where he went.




XXI

AT HOME IN THE WOODS


Mrs. Woodchuck was not so sorry, after all, that she had to leave
her home in the pasture. You see, she always moved twice a year,
anyhow. Every fall she went into the woods to live; and every
spring she returned to Farmer Green's pasture. And every time that
Mrs. Woodchuck moved, she made a new house for herself.

To be sure, there were plenty of chucks that never went to all that
trouble. They were the lazy kind. They just hunted around till they
found an old, empty house and then they moved in and made
themselves right at home. But that was not the way of Billy
Woodchuck's mother. She wanted everything neat and clean.

You remember that when Farmer Green blasted away the old stump near
Mrs. Woodchuck's bedroom he tore a hole in the very roof of the
house. And Billy and his mother and his brothers and sisters went
into the woods and spent the night in a house where his great
grandmother had once lived.

Mrs. Woodchuck said it would do, until she could dig a new one.

The very next morning she started to work. And all her children
helped her.

Billy told his mother that they ought to build the back door first
of all. You see he remembered what his mother had taught him, early
in the summer, when he made his play-houses.

"Nonsense!" she said. "Of course, we must have a back door. But we
must dig it from the _inside up_, and not from the _outside down_."

And she explained that when you build a door by digging _down_ into
the ground, there's always a heap of dirt about it, which anybody
can see. But when you are out of sight in your tunnel you can dig
right _up_ to the top of the ground and make a small, round door,
beneath a hummock of grass, or a stone, or a stump. People must
have very sharp eyes to see a back door that's made in that way,
for the dirt all falls _inside_ your house.

With all the help she had, Mrs. Woodchuck's new house was soon
finished. But it was done none too soon. She had hardly carried in
clean grass for the beds, when her children began to feel very
sleepy. At least, all of them except Billy. He was just as wide
awake as his mother.

Even after his brothers and sisters had been tucked up for their
winter's nap he was as spry as anything. And he told his mother
that he was not going to spend the winter sleeping.

"Jimmy Rabbit says that it's great fun to play in the snow," he
said.

Mrs. Woodchuck couldn't help smiling; for at that very moment Billy
was yawning as wide a yawn as you ever saw on a young chuck's face.
Though he didn't know it, he was already growing drowsy. And his
mother knew very well that no matter how much he wanted to stay
awake, in a short time he would be sound asleep.

Though Jimmy Rabbit came to Billy's house the very next day and
called and called to him, he never came out at all.




XXII

GROUND HOG DAY


Billy Woodchuck had been asleep for a long, long time. The world
above was white with snow. But no matter how hard the cold winter
winds might blow, or how heavily the snow fell, in their
underground chamber Mrs. Woodchuck's family were snug and warm in
their beds.

At last one day late in the winter Billy heard some one moving
about. He was so drowsy that at first he didn't stir. But finally
he opened an eye and saw that it was his mother who had disturbed
him.

"What is it, Mother? Has spring come?" Billy asked.

"No, my child," she answered. "At least, I do not know that it
has."

"Then why are you getting up?" Opening both his eyes, Billy was
surprised to see that Mrs. Woodchuck was putting on the warmest
clothes she had. "You're not going out of doors, are you?" he
inquired. His mother was already drawing on a pair of thick, red
mittens.

"Yes," she said. "This is Ground Hog Day and I must go out and see
what the weather is like."

"But I thought every day was Ground Hog Day for us," Billy replied.

"Well, you might say that it is," she agreed. "But this is
different. To-day is what _men_ call Ground Hog Day."

"May I come with you?" he asked. By this time he was wide awake.

Mrs. Woodchuck looked at him somewhat doubtfully.

"Young ground hogs like you aren't supposed to go out this time of
year," she said. "It's still quite cold, you know."

"Please, Mother!"

"Well, you must wear plenty of warm clothing," his mother told him.
And she gave him so many coats to put on that Billy would not have
known himself if he had looked in the surface of the brook. Of
course, he couldn't do that anyhow, then, for the brook was covered
with ice.

When Billy was ready they stole out of the room, leaving the other
children sound asleep.

"Whew!" said Billy Woodchuck when they stepped outside at last.
"How cold it is!"

The sun was shining brightly, for all the air was so chilly. And
Billy had a fine time chasing his shadow around the pasture. But he
never could quite catch it. Sometimes he thought he was going to.
But whenever he made a pounce at it his shadow moved just as
quickly. And then he had to begin all over again.

"We'd better go in," Mrs. Woodchuck said at last. And she looked
down rather sadly at her own shadow, as if something had
disappointed her.

"Oh, no!" Billy pleaded. "Let's stay out a while longer."

"It's too cold," his mother answered.

"But just look at the sun! It's as bright as can be. And I'm not a
bit sleepy. Besides, I think spring will come now--maybe
to-morrow."

But Mrs. Woodchuck knew better.

"There'll be forty more days of winter," she said.

"How do you know that?" he asked.

"It's the rule," she explained. "If we had not seen our shadows,
that would mean that spring was here; and I would wake up your
brothers and sisters. But there are our shadows, as plain as can
be! And so we must go to bed again and sleep forty days longer."

"That's a silly rule," said Billy Woodchuck. "Who made it?"

"Don't ask so many questions," Mrs. Woodchuck answered. "Do as I
tell you. Run in, now!"

And Billy had to obey. He grumbled a little. It seemed very foolish
to him. And once more he asked his mother who it was that made such
a horrid rule.

But Mrs. Woodchuck would not say another word. To tell the truth,
she did not know the answer. She only knew that it was so.


     THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Tale of Billy Woodchuck, by Arthur Scott Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BILLY WOODCHUCK ***

***** This file should be named 25090.txt or 25090.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/9/25090/

Produced by Joe Longo, Suzan Flanagan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
