The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Stetson, by John Fox Jr.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Last Stetson

Author: John Fox Jr.

Posting Date: February 9, 2009 [EBook #3024]
Release Date: January, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST STETSON ***




Produced by David Reed





THE LAST STETSON

By John Fox Jr.




I.

A MIDSUMMER freshet was running over old Gabe Bunch's water-wheel into
the Cumberland. Inside the mill Steve Marcum lay in one dark corner with
a slouched hat over his face. The boy Isom was emptying a sack of corn
into the hopper. Old Gabe was speaking his mind.

Always the miller had been a man of peace; and there was one time when
he thought the old Stetson-Lewallen feud was done. That was when Rome
Stetson, the last but one of his name, and Jasper Lewallen, the last
but one of his, put their guns down and fought with bare fists on a high
ledge above old Gabe's mill one morning at daybreak. The man who was
beaten was to leave the mountains; the other was to stay at home and
have peace. Steve Marcum, a Stetson, heard the sworn terms and saw the
fight. Jasper was fairly whipped; and when Rome let him up he proved
treacherous and ran for his gun. Rome ran too, but stumbled and fell.
Jasper whirled with his Winchester and was about to kill Rome where he
lay, when a bullet came from somewhere and dropped him back to the ledge
again. Both Steve Marcum and Rome Stetson said they had not fired the
shot; neither would say who had. Some thought one man was lying, some
thought the other was, and Jasper's death lay between the two. State
troops came then, under the Governor's order, from the Blue Grass, and
Rome had to drift down the river one night in old Gabe's canoe and on
Out of the mountains for good. Martha Lewallen, who, though Jasper's
sister, and the last of the name, loved and believed Rome, went with
him. Marcums and Braytons who had taken sides in the fight hid in the
bushes around Hazlan, or climbed over into Virginia. A railroad started
up the Cumberland. "Furriners came in to buy wild lands and get out
timber." Civilization began to press over the mountains and down on
Hazlan, as it had pressed in on Breathitt, the seat of another feud,
in another county. In Breathitt the feud was long past, and with good
reason old Gabe thought that it was done in Hazlan.

But that autumn a panic started over from England. It stopped the
railroad far down the Cumberland; it sent the "furriners" home, and
drove civilization back. Marcums and Braytons came in from hiding, and
drifted one by one to the old fighting-ground. In time they took up the
old quarrel, and with Steve Marcum and Steve Brayton as leaders, the
old Stetson-Lewallen feud went on, though but one soul was left in the
mountains of either name. That was Isom, a pale little fellow whom Rome
had left in old Gabe's care; and he, though a Stetson and a half-brother
to Rome, was not counted, because he was only a boy and a foundling, and
because his ways were queer.

There was no open rupture, no organized division--that might happen no
more. The mischief was individual now, and ambushing was more common.
Certain men were looking for each other, and it was a question of
"draw-in' quick 'n' shootin' quick" when the two met by accident, or of
getting the advantage "from the bresh."

In time Steve Marcum had come face to face with old Steve Brayton in
Hazlan, and the two Steves, as they were known, drew promptly. Marcum
was in the dust when the smoke cleared away; and now, after three months
in bed, he was just out again. He had come down to the mill to see Isom.
This was the miller's first chance for remonstrance, and, as usual,
he began to lay it down that every man who had taken a human life must
sooner or later pay for it with his own. It was an old story to Isom,
and, with a shake of impatience, he turned out the door of the mill, and
left old Gabe droning on under his dusty hat to Steve, who, being heavy
with "moonshine," dropped asleep.

Outside the sun was warm, the flood was calling from the dam, and the
boy's petulance was gone at once. For a moment he stood on the rude
platform watching the tide; then he let one bare foot into the water,
and, with a shiver of delight, dropped from the boards. In a moment his
clothes were on the ground behind a laurel thicket, and his slim white
body was flashing like a faun through the reeds and bushes up stream.
A hundred yards away the creek made a great loop about a wet thicket
of pine and rhododendron, and he turned across the bushy neck. Creeping
through the gnarled bodies of rhododendron, he dropped suddenly behind
the pine, and lay flat in the black earth. Ten yards through the
dusk before him was the half-bent figure of a man letting an old army
haversack slip from one shoulder; and Isom watched him hide it with
a rifle under a bush, and go noiselessly on towards the road. It was
Crump, Eli Crump, who had been a spy for the Lewallens in the old feud
and who was spying now for old Steve Brayton. It was the second time
Isom had seen him lurking about, and the boy's impulse was to hurry back
to the mill. But it was still peace, and without his gun Crump was not
dangerous; so Isom rose and ran on, and, splashing into the angry little
stream, shot away like a roll of birch bark through the tawny crest of
a big wave. He had done the feat a hundred times; he knew every rock and
eddy in flood-time, and he floated through them and slipped like an eel
into the mill-pond. Old Gabe was waiting for him.

"Whut ye mean, boy," he said, sharply, "reskin' the fever an' ager this
way? No wonder folks thinks ye air half crazy. Git inter them clothes
now 'n' come in hyeh. You'll ketch yer death o' cold swimmin' this way
atter a fresh."

The boy was shivering when he took his seat at the funnel, but he did
not mind that; some day he meant to swim over that dam. Steve still lay
motionless in the corner near him, and Isom lifted the slouched hat
and began tickling his lips with a straw. Steve was beyond the point of
tickling, and Isom dropped the hat back and turned to tell the miller
what he had seen in the thicket. The dim interior darkened just then,
and Crump stood in the door. Old Gabe stared hard at him without a word
of welcome, but Crump shuffled to a chair unasked, and sat like a toad
astride it, with his knees close up under his arms, and his wizened face
in his hands.

Meeting Isom's angry glance, he shifted his own uneasily.

"Seed the new preacher comm' 'long today?" he asked. Drawing one dirty
finger across his forehead, "Got a long scar 'cross hyeh."

The miller shook his head.

"Well, he's a-comm'. I've been waitin' fer him up the road, but I reckon
I got to git 'cross the river purty soon now."

Crump had been living over in Breathitt since the old feud. He had been
"convicted" over there by Sherd Raines, a preacher from the Jellico
Hills, and he had grown pious. Indeed, he had been trailing after Raines
from place to place, and he was following the circuit-rider now to the
scene of his own deviltry--Hazlan.

"Reckon you folks don't know I got the cirkit-rider to come over hyeh,
do ye?" he went on. "Ef he can't preach! Well, I'd tell a man! He kin
jus' draw the heart out'n a holler log! He 'convicted' me fust night,
over thar in Breathitt. He come up thar, ye know, to stop the feud, he
said; 'n' thar was laughin' from one eendo' Breathitt to t'other; but
thar was the whoppinest crowd thar I ever see when he did come. The
meetin'-house wasn't big enough to hold 'em, so he goes out on the
aidge o' town, n' climbs on to a stump. He hed a woman with him from the
settlemints--she's a-waitin' at Hazlan fer him now-'n' she had a cur'us
little box, 'n' he put her 'n' the box on a big rock, 'n' started in a
callin' 'em his bretherin' 'n' sisteren, 'n' folks seed mighty soon
thet he meant it, too. He's always mighty easylike, tell he gits to the
blood-penalty."

At the word, Crump's listeners paid sudden heed. Old Gabe's knife
stopped short in the heart of the stick he was whittling; the boy looked
sharply up from the running meal into Crump's face and sat still.

Well, he jes prayed to the Almighty as though he was a-talkin' to him
face to face, 'n' then the woman put her hands on that box, 'n' the
sweetes' sound anybody thar ever heerd come outen it. Then she got to
singin'. Hit wusn't nuthin' anybody thar'd ever heerd; but some o' the
women folks was a snifflin' 'fore she got through. He pitched right into
the feud, as he calls hit, 'n' the sin o' sheddin' human blood, I tell
ye; 'n' 'twixt him and the soldiers I reckon thar won't be no more
fightin' in Breathitt. He says, 'n' he always says it mighty loud
--Crump raised his own voice--"thet the man as kills his feller-critter
hev some day got ter give up his own blood, sartin 'n' shore."

It was old Gabe's pet theory, and he was nodding approval. The boy's
parted lips shook with a spasm of fear, and were as quickly shut tight
with suspicion. Steve raised his head as though he too had heard the
voice, and looked stupidly about him.

"I tol' him," Crump went on, "thet things was already a-gettin' kind o'
frolicsome round hyeh agin; thet the Marcums 'n' Braytons was a-takin'
up the ole war, 'n' would be a-plunkin' one 'nother every time they got
together, 'n' a-gittin' the whole country in fear 'n' tremblin'--now
thet Steve Marcum had come back."

Steve began to scowl and a vixenish smile hovered at Isom's lips.

"He knows mighty well--fer I tol' him--thet thar hain't a wuss man in all
these mountains than thet very Steve--" The name ended in a gasp, and the
wizened gossip was caught by the throat and tossed, chair and all, into
a corner of the mill.

"None o' that, Steve!" called the miller, sternly. "Not hyeh. Don't hurt
him now!"

Crump's face stiffened with such terror that Steve broke into a laugh.

"Well, ye air a skeery critter!" he said, contemptuously. "I hain't
goin' to hurt him, Uncl' Gabe, but he must be a plumb idgit, a-talkin'
'bout folks to thar face, 'n' him so puny an' spindlin'! You git!"

Crump picked himself up trembling--"Don't ye ever let me see ye on this
side o' the river agin, now "--and shuffled out, giving Marcum one look
of fear and unearthly hate.

"Convicted!" snorted Steve. "I heerd old Steve Brayton had hired him to
waylay me, 'n' I swar I believe hit's so."

"Well, he won't hev to give him more'n a chaw o' tobaccer now," said
Gabe. "He'll come purty near doin' hit hisseif, I reckon, ef he gits
the chance."

"Well, he kin git the chance ef I gits my leetle account settled with ole
Steve Brayton fust. 'Pears like that old hog ain't satisfied shootin'
me hisself." Stretching his arms with a yawn, Steve winked at Isom and
moved to the door. The boy followed him outside.

"We're goin' fer ole Brayton about the dark o' the next moon, boy," he
said. "He's sort o' s'picious now, 'n' we'll give him a leetle time to
git tame. I'll have a bran'-new Winchester fer ye, Isom. Hit ull be like
ole times agin, when Rome was hyeh. Whut's the matter, boy?" he asked,
suddenly. Isom looked unresponsive, listless.

"Air ye gittin' sick agin?"

"Well, I hain't feelin' much peert, Steve."

"Take keer o' yourself, boy. Don't git sick now. We'll have to watch Eli
Crump purty close. I don't know why I hain't killed thet spyin' skunk
long ago, 'ceptin' I never had a shore an' sartin reason fer doin 'it."

Isom started to speak then and stopped. He would learn more first; and
he let Steve go on home unwarned.

The two kept silence after Marcum had gone. Isom turned away from old
Gabe, and stretched himself out on the platform. He looked troubled. The
miller, too, was worried.

"Jus' a hole in the groun'," he said, half to himself; "that's whut we're
all comm' to! 'Pears like we mought help one 'nother to keep out'n hit,
'stid o' holpin' 'em in."

Brown shadows were interlacing out in the mill-pond, where old Gabe's
eyes were intent. A current of cool air had started down the creek to
the river. A katydid began to chant. Twilight was coming, and the miller
rose.

"Hit's a comfort to know you won't be mixed up in all this devilment,"
he said; and then, as though he had found more light in the gloom:
"Hit's a comfort to know the new rider air shorely a-preachin' the right
doctrine, 'n' I want ye to go hear him. Blood for blood-life fer a life!
Your grandad shot ole Tom Lewallen in Hazlan. Ole Jack Lewallen shot him
from the bresh. Tom Stetson killed ole Jack; ole Jass killed Tom, 'n' so
hit comes down, fer back as I can ricollect. I hev nuver knowed hit to
fail." The lad had risen on one elbow. His face was pale and uneasy, and
he averted it when the miller turned in the door.

"You'd better stay hyeh, son, 'n' finish up the grist. Hit won't take
long. Hev ye got victuals fer yer supper?"

Isom nodded, without looking around, and when old Gabe was gone he rose
nervously and dropped helplessly back to the floor.

"'Pears like old Gabe knows I killed Jass," he breathed, sullenly.
"'Pears like all of 'em knows hit, 'n' air jus' a-tormentin' me."

Nobody dreamed that the boy and his old gun had ended that fight on the
cliff; and without knowing it, old Gabe kept the lad in constant torture
with his talk of the blood-penalty. But Isom got used to it in time,
for he had shot to save his brother's life. Steve Marcum treated him
thereafter as an equal. Steve's friends, too, changed in manner towards
him because Steve had. And now, just when he had reached the point of
wondering whether, after all, there might not be one thing that old Gabe
did not know, Crump had come along with the miller's story, which he had
got from still another, a circuit-rider, who must know the truth. The
fact gave him trouble.

"Mebbe hit's goin' to happen when I goes with Steve atter ole Brayton,"
he mumbled, and he sat thinking the matter over, until a rattle and a
whir inside the mill told him that the hopper was empty. He arose to
fill it, and coming out again, he heard hoof-beats on the dirt road. A
stranger rode around the rhododendrons and shouted to him, asking the
distance to Hazlan. He took off his hat when Isom answered, to wipe the
dust and perspiration from his face, and the boy saw a white scar across
his forehead. A little awestricken, the lad walked towards him.

"Air you the new rider whut's goin' to preach up to Hazlan?" he asked.

Raines smiled at the solemnity of the little fellow. "Yes," he said,
kindly. "Won't you come up and hear me?"

"Yes, sir," he said, and his lips parted as though he wanted to say
something else, but Raines did not notice.

"I wished I had axed him," he said, watching the preacher ride away.
"Uncle Gabe knows might' nigh ever'thing, 'n' he says so. Crump said
the rider said so; but Crump might 'a' been lyin'. He 'most al'ays is. I
wished I had axed him."

Mechanically the lad walked along the millrace, which was made of hewn
boards and hollow logs. In every crevice grass hung in thick bunches to
the ground or tipped wiry blades over the running water. Tightening
a prop where some silvery jet was getting too large, he lifted the
tail-gate a trifle and lay down again on the platform near the old
wheel. Out in the mill-pond the water would break now and then into
ripples about some unwary moth, and the white belly of a fish would
flash from the surface. It was the only sharp accent on the air. The
chant of the katydids had become a chorus, and the hush of darkness
was settling over the steady flow of water and the low drone of the
millstones.

"I hain't afeerd," he kept saying to himself. "I hain't afeerd o'
nothin' nor nobody;" but he lay brooding until his head throbbed, until
darkness filled the narrow gorge, and the strip of dark blue up through
the trees was pointed with faint stars. He was troubled when he rose,
and climbed on Rome's horse and rode homeward--so troubled that he
turned finally and started back in a gallop for Hazlan.

It was almost as Crump had said. There was no church in Hazlan, and, as
in Breathitt, the people had to follow Raines outside the town, and he
preached from the roadside. The rider's Master never had a tabernacle
more simple: overhead the stars and a low moon; close about, the trees
still and heavy with summer; a pine torch over his head like a yellow
plume; two tallow dips hung to a beech on one side, and flicking to the
other the shadows of the people who sat under them. A few Marcums and
Braytons were there, one faction shadowed on Raines's right, one on
his left. Between them the rider stood straight, and prayed as though
talking with some one among the stars. Behind him the voice of the woman
at her tiny organ rose among the leaves. And then he spoke as he had
prayed; and from the first they listened like children, while in their
own homely speech he went on to tell them, just as he would have told
children, a story that some of them had never heard before. "Forgive
your enemies as He had forgiven his," that was his plea. Marcums and
Braytons began to press in from the darkness on each side, forgetting
each other as the rest of the people forgot them. And when the story
was quite done, Raines stood a full minute without a word. No one was
prepared for what followed. Abruptly his voice rose sternly--"Thou
shalt not kill"; and then Satan took shape under the torch. The man was
transformed, swaying half crouched before them. The long black hair fell
across the white scar, and picture after picture leaped from his tongue
with such vividness that a low wail started through the audience, and
women sobbed in their bonnets. It was penalty for bloodshed--not in this
world: penalty eternal in the next; and one slight figure under the dips
staggered suddenly aside into the darkness.

It was Isom; and no soul possessed of devils was ever more torn than
his, when he splashed through Troubled Fork and rode away that night.
Half a mile on he tried to keep his eyes on his horse's neck, anywhere
except on one high gray rock to which they were raised against his
will--the peak under which he had killed young Jasper. There it was
staring into the moon, but watching him as he fled through the woods,
shuddering at shadows, dodging branches that caught at him as he passed,
and on in a run, until he drew rein and slipped from his saddle at the
friendly old mill. There was no terror for him there. There every bush
was a friend; every beech trunk a sentinel on guard for him in shining
armor.

It was the old struggle that he was starting through that night--the old
fight of humanity from savage to Christian; and the lad fought it until,
with the birth of his wavering soul, the premonitions of the first dawn
came on. The patches of moonlight shifted, paling. The beech columns
mottled slowly with gray and brown. A ruddy streak was cleaving the east
like a slow sword of fire. The chill air began to pulse and the mists to
stir. Moisture had gathered on the boy's sleeve. His horse was stamping
uneasily, and the lad rose stiffly, his face gray but calm, and started
home. At old Gabe's gate he turned in his saddle to look where, under
the last sinking star, was once the home of his old enemies. Farther
down, under the crest, was old Steve Brayton, alive, and at that moment
perhaps asleep.

"Forgive your enemies;" that was the rider's plea. Forgive old Steve,
who had mocked him, and had driven Rome from the mountains; who had
threatened old Gabe's life, and had shot Steve Marcum almost to death!
The lad drew breath quickly, and standing in his stirrups, stretched out
his fist, and let it drop, slowly.




II.

OLD Gabe was just starting out when Isom' reached the cabin, and the old
man thought the boy had been at the mill all night. Isom slept through
the day, and spoke hardly a word when the miller came home, though the
latter had much to say of Raines, the two Steves, and of the trouble
possible. He gave some excuse for not going with old Gabe the next day,
and instead went into the woods alone.

Late in the middle of the afternoon he reached the mill. Old Gabe sat
smoking outside the door, and Isom stretched himself out on the platform
close to the water, shading his eyes from the rich sunlight with one
ragged sleeve.

"Uncl' Gabe," he said, suddenly, "s'posin' Steve Brayton was to step
out'n the bushes thar some mawnin' 'n' pull down his Winchester on ye,
would ye say, 'Lawd, fergive him, fer he don't know whut he do'?"

Old Gabe had told him once about a Stetson and a Lewallen who were heard
half a mile away praying while they fought each other to death with
Winchesters. "There was no use prayin' an' shootin'," the miller
declared. There was but one way for them to escape damnation; that was
to throw down their guns and make friends. But the miller had forgotten,
and his mood that morning was whimsical.

"Well, I mought, Isom," he said, "ef I didn't happen to have a gun
handy."

The humor was lost on Isom. His chin was moving up and down, and his
face was serious. That was just it. He could forgive Jass--Jass was dead;
he could forgive Crump, if he caught him in no devilment; old Brayton
even--after Steve's revenge was done. But now--The boy rose, shaking his
head.

"Uncl' Gabe," he said with sudden passion, "whut ye reckon Rome's
a-doin'?"

The miller looked a little petulant. "Don't ye git tired axin' me thet
question, Isom? Rome's a-scratchin' right peert fer a livin', I reckon,
fer hisself 'n' Marthy. Yes, 'n' mebbe fer a young 'un too by this time.
Ef ye air honin' fer Rome, why don't ye rack out 'n' go to him? Lawd
knows I'd hate ter see ye go, but I tol' Rome I'd let ye whenever ye got
ready, 'n' so I will."

Isom had no answer, and old Gabe was puzzled. It was always this way.
The boy longed for Rome, the miller could see. He spoke of him sometimes
with tears, and sometimes he seemed to be on the point of going to him,
but he shrank inexplicably when the time for leaving came.

Isom started into the mill now without a word, as usual. Old Gabe
noticed that his feet were unsteady, and with quick remorse began to
question him.

"Kinder puny, hain't ye, Isom?"

"Well, I hain't feelin' much peert."

"Hit was mighty keerless," old Gabe said, with kindly reproach,
"swimmin' the crick atter a fresh."

"Hit wasn't the swimmin'," he protested, dropping weakly at the
threshold. "Hit was settin' out 'n the woods. I was in Hazlan t'other
night, Und' Gabe, to hear the new rider."

The miller looked around with quick interest. "I've been skeered afore
by riders a-tellin' 'bout the torments o' hell, but I never heerd
nothin' like his tellin' 'bout the Lord. He said the Lord was jes as
pore as anybody thar, and lived jes as rough; thet He made fences and
barns n' ox-yokes 'n' sech like, an' He couldn't write His own name when
He started out to save the worl'; an' when he come to the p'int whar His
enemies tuk hol' of Him, the rider jes crossed his fingers up over his
head 'n' axed us if we didn't know how it hurt to run a splinter into
a feller's hand when he's loggin' or a thorn into yer foot when ye're
goin' barefooted."

"Hit jes made me sick, Uncl' Gabe, hearin' him tell how they stretched
Him out on a cross o' wood, when He'd come down fer nothin' but to save
'em, 'n' stuck a spear big as a co'n-knife into His side, 'n' give Him
vinegar, 'n' let Him hang thar 'n' die, with His own mammy a-stand-in'
down on the groun' a-cryin' 'n' watchin' Him. Some folks thar never
heerd sech afore. The women was a-rockin', 'n' ole Granny Day axed right
out ef thet tuk place a long time ago; 'n' the rider said, 'Yes, a long
time ago, mos two thousand years.' Granny was a-cryin', Uncl' Gabe, 'n'
she said, sorter soft, 'Stranger, let's hope that hit hain't so'; 'n'
the rider says, But hit air so; n' He fergive em while they was doin'
it.' Thet's whut got me, Uncl' Gabe, 'n' when the woman got to singin',
somethin' kinder broke loose hyeh"--Isom passed his hand over his thin
chest--"'n' I couldn't git breath. I was mos' afeerd to ride home. I jes
layed at the mill studyin', till I thought my head would bust. I reckon
hit was the spent a-work-in me. Looks like I was mos' convicted, Uncl'
Gabe." His voice trembled and he stopped. "Crump was a-lyin'," he cried,
suddenly. "But hit's wuss, Und' Gabe; hit's wuss! You say a life fer a
life in this worl'; the rider says hit's in the next, 'n' I'm mis'ble,
Uncl' Gabe. Ef Rome--I wish Rome was hyeh," he cried, helplessly. "I
don't know whut to do."

The miller rose and limped within the mill, and ran one hand through
the shifting corn. He stood in the doorway, looking long and perplexedly
towards Hazlan; he finally saw, he thought, just what the lad's trouble
was. He could give him some comfort, and he got his chair and dragged it
out to the door across the platform, and sat down in silence.

"Isom," he said at last, "the Spent air shorely a-workin' ye, 'n' I'm
glad of it. But ye mus 'n t worry about the penalty a-fallin' on Rome.
Steve Marcum killed Jass--he can't fool me--'n' I've told Steve he's got
thet penalty to pay ef he gits up this trouble. I'm glad the Spent's
a-workin' ye, but ye mus'n' t worry 'bout Rome."

Isom rose suddenly on one elbow, and with a moan lay back and crossed
his arms over his face.

Old Gabe turned and left him.

"Git up, Isom." It was the miller's voice again, an hour later. "You
better go home now. Ride the hoss, boy," he and, kindly.

Isom rose, and old Gabe helped him mount, and stood at the door. The
horse started, but the boy pulled him to a standstill again.

"I want to ax ye jes one thing more, Uncl' Gabe," he said, slowly.
"S'posin' Steve had a-killed Jass to keep him from killin' Rome, hev he
got to be damned fer it jes the same? Hev he got to give up eternal life
anyways? Hain't thar no way out'n it--no way?"

There was need for close distinction now and the miller was deliberate.

"Ef Steve shot Jass," he said, "jes to save Rome's life--he had the right
to shoot him. Thar hain't no doubt 'bout that. The law says so.
But"--there was a judicial pause--"I've heerd Steve say that he hated Jass
wuss' n anybody on earth, 'cept old Brayton; 'n' ef he wus glad o' the
chance o' killin' him, why--the Lord air merciful, Isom; the Bible air
true, 'n' hit says an 'eye fer an eye, a tooth fer a tooth,' 'n' I never
knowed hit to fail--but the Lord air merciful. Ef Steve would only jes
repent, 'n' ef, 'stid o' fightin' the Lord by takin' human life, he'd
fight fer Him by savin' it, I reckon the Lord would fergive him. Fer
ef ye lose yer life fer Him, He do say you'll find it agin
somewhar--sometime."

Old Gabe did not see the sullen despair that came into the boy's tense
face. The subtlety of the answer had taken the old man back to the days
when he was magistrate, and his eyes were half closed. Isom rode away
without a word. From the dark of the mill old Gabe turned to look after
him again.

"I'm afeerd he's a-gittin' feverish agin. Hit looks like he's convicted;
but"--he knew the wavering nature of the boy--"I don't know--I don't
know."

Going home an hour later, the old man saw several mountaineers climbing
the path towards Steve Marcum's cabin; it meant the brewing of mischief;
and when he stopped at his own gate, he saw at the bend of the road a
figure creep from the bushes on one side into the bushes on the other.

It looked like Crump.




III.

IT was Crump, and fifty yards behind him was Isom, slipping through the
brush after him--Isom's evil spirit--old Gabe, Raines, "conviction,"
blood-penalty, forgotten, all lost in the passion of a chase which has
no parallel when the game is man.

Straight up the ravine Crump went along a path which led to Steve
Marcum's cabin. There was a clump of rhododendron at the head of the
ravine, and near Steve's cabin. About this hour Marcum would be chopping
wood for supper, or sitting out in his porch in easy range from the
thicket. Crump's plan was plain: he was about his revenge early, and
Isom was exultant.

"Oh, no, Eli, you won't git Steve this time. Oh, naw!"

The bushes were soon so thick that he could no longer follow Crump by
sight, and every few yards he had to stop to listen, and then steal on
like a mountain-cat towards the leaves rustling ahead of him. Half-way
up the ravine Crump turned to the right and stopped. Puzzled, Isom
pushed so close that the spy, standing irresolute on the edge of
the path, whirled around. The boy sank to his face, and in a moment
footsteps started and grew faint; Crump had darted across the path, and
was running through the undergrowth up the spur. Isom rose and hurried
after him; and when, panting hard, he reached the top, the spy's
skulking figure was sliding from Steve's house and towards the Breathitt
road; and with a hot, puzzled face, the boy went down after it.

On a little knob just over a sudden turn in the road Crump stopped, and
looking sharply about him, laid his gun down. Just in front of him were
two rocks, waist-high, with a crevice between them. Drawing a long knife
from his pocket, he climbed upon them, and began to cut carefully away
the spreading top of a bush that grew on the other side. Isom crawled
down towards him like a lizard, from tree to tree. A moment later the
spy was filling up the crevice with stones, and Isom knew what he was
about; he was making a "blind" to waylay Steve, who, the boy knew, was
going to Breathitt by that road the next Sunday. How did Crump know
that--how did he know everything? The crevice filled, Crump cut branches
and stuck them between the rocks. Then he pushed his rifle through the
twigs, and taking aim several times, withdrew it. When he turned away
at last and started down to the road, he looked back once more, and Isom
saw him grinning. Almost chuckling in answer, the lad slipped around the
knob to the road the other way, and Crump threw up his gun with a gasp
of fright when a figure rose out of the dusk before him.

"Hol' on, Eli!" said Isom, easily. "Don't git skeered! Hit's nobody but
me. Whar ye been?"

Crump laughed, so quick was he disarmed of suspicion. "Jes up the river
a piece to see Aunt Sally Day. She's a fust cousin o' mine by marriage."

Jsom's right hand was slipping back as if to rest on his hip. "D'you say
you'd been 'convicted,' Eli?"

Crump's answer was chantlike. "Yes, Lawd reckon I have."

"Goin' to stop all o' yer lyin', air ye," Isom went on, in the same
tone, and Crump twitched as though struck suddenly from behind, "an'
stealin' 'n' lay-wayin'?"

"Look a-hyeh, boy--" he began, roughly, and mumbling a threat, started
on.

"Uh, Eli!" Even then the easy voice fooled him again, and he turned.
Isom had a big revolver on a line with his breast. "Drap yer gun!" he
said, tremulously.

Crump tried to laugh, but his guilty face turned gray. "Take keer, boy,"
he gasped; "yer gun's cocked. Take keer, I tell ye!"

"Drap it, damn ye!" Isom called in sudden fury, "'n' git clean away from
it!" Crump backed, and Isom came forward and stood with one foot on the
fallen Winchester.

"I seed ye, Eli. Been makin' a blind fer Steve, hev ye? Goin' to shoot
him in the back, too, air ye? You're ketched at last, Eli. You've done
a heap o' devilment. You're gittin' wuss all the time. You oughter be
dead, 'n' now--"

Crump found voice in a cry of terror and a whine for mercy. The boy
looked at him, unable to speak his contempt.

"Git down thar!" he said, finally; and Crump, knowing what was wanted,
stretched himself in the road. Isom sat down on a stone, the big pistol
across one knee.

"Roll over!" Crump rolled at full length.

"Git up!" Isom laughed wickedly. "Ye don't look purty, Eli." He lifted
the pistol and nipped a cake of dirt from the road between Crump's feet.
With another cry of fear, the spy began a vigorous dance.

"Hol' on, Eli; I don't want ye to dance. Ye belong to the chu'ch now,
'n' I wouldn't have ye go agin yer religion fer nothin'. Stan' still!"
Another bullet and another cut between Crump's feet. "'Pears like ye
don't think I kin shoot straight. Eli," he went on, reloading the empty
chambers, "some folks think I'm a idgit, 'n' I know 'em. Do you think
I'm a idgit, Eli?"

"Actin' mighty nateral now." Isom was raising the pistol again. "Oh,
Lawdy! Don't shoot, boy--don't shoot!

"Git down on yer knees! Now I want ye to beg fer mercy thet ye never
showed--thet ye wouldn't 'a' showed Steve... Purty good," he said,
encouragingly.

"Mebbe ye kin pray a leetle, seem' ez ye air a chu'ch member. Pray fer
yer enemies, Eli; Uncl' Gabe says ye must love yer enemies. I know how
ye loves me, 'n' I want yer to pray fer me. The Lawd mus' sot a powerful
store by a good citizen like you. Ax him to fergive me fer killin' ye."

"Have mercy, O Lawd," prayed Crump, to command--and the prayer was
subtle--"on the murderer of this Thy servant. A life fer a life, Thou
hev said, O Lawd. Fer killin' me he will foller me, 'n' ef Ye hev not
mussy he is boun' fer the lowes' pit o' hell, O Lawd--"

It was Isom's time to wince now, and Crump's pious groan was cut short.

"Shet up!" cried the boy, sharply, and he sat a moment silent. "You've
been a-spyin' on us sence I was borned, Eli," he said, reflectively.

"I believe ye lay-wayed dad. Y'u spied on Rome. Y'u told the soldiers
whar he was a-hidin' Y'u tried to shoot him from the bresh. Y'u found
out Steve was goin' to Breathitt on Sunday, 'n' you've jes made a blind
to shoot him in the back. I reckon thar's no meanness ye hain't done.
Dad's al'ays said ye sot a snare fer a woman once--a woman! Y'u loaded a
musket with slugs, 'n' tied a string to the trigger, 'n' stretched hit
'cross the path, 'n' y'u got up on a cliff 'n' whistled to make her slow
up jes when she struck the string. I reckon thet's yer wust--but I don't
know."

Several times Crump raised his hands in protest while his arraignment
was going on; several times he tried to speak, but his lips refused
utterance. The boy's voice was getting thicker and thicker, and he was
nervously working the cock of the big pistol up and down.

"Git up," he said; and Crump rose with a spring. The lad's tone meant
release.

"You hain't wuth the risk. I hain't goin' ter kill ye. I jus' wanted
ter banter ye 'n' make ye beg. You're a good beggar, Eli, 'n' a powerful
prayer. You'll be a shinin' light in the chu'ch, ef ye gits a chance ter
shine long. Fer lemme tell ye, nobody ever ketched ye afore. But you're
ketched now, an' I'm goin' to tell Steve. He'll be a-watchin' fer ye,
'n' so 'll I. I tell ye in time, ef ye ever come over hyeh agin as long
as you live, you'll never git back alive. Turn roun'! Hev ye got any
balls?" he asked, feeling in Crump's pockets for cartridges. "No;
well"--he picked up the Winchester and pumped the magazine empty--"I'll
keep these," he said, handing Crump the empty rifle. "Now git away--an'
git away quick!"

Crump's slouching footsteps went out of hearing, and Isom sat where he
was. His elbows dropped to his knees. His face dropped slowly into his
hands, and the nettles of remorse began to sting. He took the back of
one tremulous hand presently to wipe the perspiration from his forehead,
and he found it burning. A sharp pain shot through his eyes. He knew
what that meant, and feeling dizzy, he rose and started a little blindly
towards home.

Old Gabe was waiting for him. He did not answer the old man's querulous
inquiry, but stumbled towards a bed. An hour later, when the miller was
rubbing his forehead, he opened his eyes, shut them, and began to talk.

"I reckon I hain't much better 'n Eli, Und' Gabe," he said, plaintively.
"I've been abusin' him down thar in the woods. I come might' nigh
killin' him onct." The old man stroked on, scarcely heeding the boy's
words, so much nonsense would he talk when ill.

"I've been lyin' to ye, Uncl' Gabe, 'n' a-deceivin' of ye right along.
Steve's a-goin' atter ole Brayton--I'm goin' too--Steve didn't kill
Jass--hit wusn't Steve--hit wusn't Rome--hit was--" The last word stopped
behind his shaking lips; he rose suddenly in bed, looked wildly into the
miller's startled face, and dropping with a sob to the bed, went sobbing
to sleep.

Old Gabe went back to his pipe, and while he smoked, his figure shrank
slowly in his chair. He went to bed finally, but sleep would not come,
and he rose again and built up the fire and sat by it, waiting for day.
His own doctrine, sternly taught for many a year, had come home to him;
and the miller's face when he opened his door was gray as the breaking
light.




IV.

THERE was little peace for old Gabe that day at the mill. And when he
went home at night he found cause for the thousand premonitions that had
haunted him. The lad was gone.

A faint light in the east was heralding the moon when Isom reached Steve
Marcum's gate. There were several horses hitched to the fence, several
dim forms seated in the porch, and the lad halloed for Steve, whose
shadow shot instantly from the door and came towards him.

"Glad ter see ye, Isom," he called, jubilantly. "I was jus' about to sen'
fer ye. How'd ye happen to come up?"

Isom answered in a low voice with the news of Crump's "blind," and Steve
laughed and swore in the same breath.

"Come hyeh!" he said, leading the way back; and at the porch he had Isom
tell the story again.

"Whut d' I tell ye, boys?" he asked, triumphantly. "Don't believe ye
more 'n half believed me."

Three more horsemen rode up to the gate and came into the light. Every
man was armed, and at Isom's puzzled look, Steve caught the lad by the
arm and led him around the chimney-corner. He was in high spirits.

"'Pears like ole times, Isom. I'm a-goin' fer thet cussed ole Steve
Brayton this very night. He's behind Crump. I s'picioned it afore; now
I know it for sartain. He's a-goin' to give Eli a mule 'n' a Winchester
fer killin' me. We're goin' to s'prise him to-night. He won't be
look-in' fer us--I've fixed that. I wus jus' about to sen' fer ye. I
hain't fergot how ye kin handle a gun." Steve laughed significantly.
"Ye're a good frien' o' mine, 'n' I'm goin' to show ye thet I'm a frien'
o' yourn."

Isom's paleness was unnoticed in the dark. The old throbbing began to
beat again at his temple; the old haze started from his eyes.

"Hyeh's yer gun, Isom," he heard Steve saying next. The fire was blazing
into his face. At the chimney-corner was the bent figure of old Daddy
Marcum, and across his lap shone a Winchester. Steve was pointing at it,
his grim face radiant; the old man's toothless mouth was grinning, and
his sharp black eyes were snapping up at him.

"Hit's yourn, I tell ye," said Steve again. "I aimed jes to lend it
to ye, but ye've saved me frum gittin' killed, mebbe, 'n' hit's yourn
now--yourn, boy, fer keeps."

Steve was holding the gun out to him now. The smooth cold touch of the
polished barrel thrilled him. It made everything for an instant clear
again, and feeling weak, Isom sat down on the bed, gripping the treasure
in both trembling hands. On one side of him some one was repeating
Steve's plan of attack. Old Brayton's cabin was nearly opposite, but
they would go up the river, cross above the mill, and ride back. The
night was cloudy, but they would have the moonlight now and then for the
climb up the mountain. They would creep close, and when the moon was hid
they would run in and get old Brayton alive, if possible. Then--the rest
was with Steve.

Across the room he could hear Steve telling the three new-comers, with
an occasional curse, about Crump's blind, and how he knew that old
Brayton was hiring Crump.

"Old Steve's meaner 'n Eli," he said to himself, and a flame of the old
hate surged up from the fire of temptation in his heart. Steve Marcum
was his best friend; Steve had shielded him. The boy had promised to
join him against old Brayton, and here was the Winchester, brand-new, to
bind his word.

"Git ready, boys; git ready."

It was Steve's voice, and in Isom's ears the preacher's voice rang after
it. Again that blinding mist before his eyes, and the boy brushed at
it irritably. He could see the men buckling cartridge-belts, but he sat
still. Two or three men were going out. Daddy Marcum was leaning on a
chair at the door, looking eagerly at each man as he passed.

"Hain't ye goin', Isom?"

Somebody was standing before him twirling a rifle on its butt, a boy
near Isom's age. The whirling gun made him dizzy.

"Stop it!" he cried, angrily. Old Daddy Marcum was answering the boy's
question from the door.

"Isom goin'?" he piped, proudly. "I reckon he air. Whar's yer belt, boy?
Git ready. Git ready."

Isom rose then--he could not answer sitting down--and caught at a bedpost
with one hand, while he fumbled at his throat with the other.

"I hain't goin'."

Steve heard at the door, and whirled around. Daddy Marcum was tottering
across the floor, with one bony hand uplifted.

"You're a coward!" The name stilled every sound. Isom, with eyes afire,
sprang at the old man to strike, but somebody caught his arm and forced
him back to the bed.

"Shet up, dad," said Steve, angrily, looking sharply into Isom's face.
"Don't ye see the boy's sick? He needn't go ef he don't want to. Time to
start, boys."

The tramp of heavy boots started across the puncheon floor and porch
again. Isom could hear Steve's orders outside; the laughs and jeers and
curses of the men as they mounted their horses; he heard the cavalcade
pass through the gate, the old man's cackling good-by; then the horses'
hoofs going down the mountain, and Daddy Marcum's hobbling step on the
porch again. He was standing in the middle of the floor, full in the
firelight, when the old man reached the threshold--standing in a trance,
with a cartridge-belt in his hand.

"Good fer you, Isom--"

The cry was apologetic, and stopped short.

"The critter's fersakcn," he quavered, and cowed by the boy's strange
look, the old man shrank away from him along the wall. But Isom seemed
neither to see nor hear. He caught up his rifle, and, wavering an
instant, tossed it with the belt on the bed and ran out the door. The
old man followed, dumb with amazement.

"Isom!" he called, getting his wits and his tongue at last. "Hyeh's yer
gun! Come back, I tell ye! You've fergot yer gun! Isom! Isom!"

The voice piped shrilly out into the darkness, and piped back without
answer.

A steep path, dangerous even by day, ran snakelike from the cabin down
to the water's edge. It was called Isom's path after that tragic night.
No mountaineer went down it thereafter without a firm faith that only by
the direct help of Heaven could the boy, in his flight down through the
dark, have reached the river and the other side alive. The path dropped
from ledge to ledge, and ran the brink of precipices and chasms. In a
dozen places the boy crashed through the undergrowth from one slippery
fold to the next below, catching at roots and stones, slipping past
death a score of times, and dropping on till a flood of yellow light
lashed the gloom before him. Just there the river was most narrow; the
nose of a cliff swerved the current sharply across, and on the other
side an eddy ran from it up stream. These earthly helps he had, and he
needed them.

There had been a rain-storm, and the waves swept him away like
thistle-down, and beat back at him as he fought through them and stood
choked and panting on the other shore. He did not dare stop to rest.
The Marcums, too, had crossed the river up at the ford by this time, and
were galloping towards him; and Isom started on and up. When he reached
the first bench of the spur the moon was swinging over Thunderstruck
Knob. The clouds broke as he climbed; strips of radiant sky showed
between the rolling masses, and the mountain above was light and dark
in quick succession. He had no breath when he reached the ledge that ran
below old Steve's cabin, and flinging one arm above it, he fell through
sheer exhaustion. The cabin was dark as the clump of firs behind it;
the inmates were unsuspecting; and Steve Marcum and his men were not
far below. A rumbling started under him, while he lay there and grew
faint--the rumble of a stone knocked from the path by a horse's hoof.
Isom tried to halbo, but his voice stopped in a whisper, and he
painfully drew himself upon the rock, upright under the bright moon.
A quick oath of warning came then--it was Crump's shrill voice in the
Brayton cabin--and Isom stumbled forward with both hands thrown up and
a gasping cry at his lips. One flash came through a port-hole of the
cabin. A yell broke on the night--Crump's cry again--and the boy swayed
across the rock, and falling at the brink, dropped with a limp struggle
out of sight.




V.

THE news of Isom's fate reached the miller by way of Hazlan before the
next noon. Several men in the Brayton cabin had recognized the boy in
the moonlight. At daybreak they found bloodstains on the ledge and on a
narrow shelf a few feet farther down. Isom had slipped from one to the
other, they said, and in his last struggle had rolled over into Dead
Creek, and had been swept into the Cumberland.

It was Crump who had warned the Braytons. Nobody ever knew how he had
learned Steve Marcum's purpose. And old Brayton on his guard and in his
own cabin was impregnable. So the Marcums, after a harmless fusillade,
had turned back cursing. Mocking shouts followed after them,
pistol-shots, even the scraping of a fiddle and shuffling on the ledge.
But they kept on, cursing across the river and back to Daddy Marcum,
who was standing in the porch, peering for them through the dawn, with a
story to tell about Isom.

"The critter was teched in the head," the old man said, and this was
what the Braytons, too, believed. But Steve Marcum, going to search for
Isom's body next day, gave old Gabe another theory. He told the miller
how Daddy Marcum had called Isom a coward, and Steve said the boy had
gone ahead to prove he was no coward.

"He had mighty leetle call to prove it to me. Think o' his takin' ole
Brayton all by hisself!" he said, with a look at the yellow, heaving
Cumberland. "'N', Lord! think o' his swimmin' that river in the dark!"

Old Gabe asked a question fiercely then and demanded the truth, and
Steve told him about the hand-to-hand fight on the mountain-side, about
young Jasper's treachery, and how the boy, who was watching the fight,
fired just in time to save Rome. It made all plain at last--Rome's and
Steve's denials, Isom's dinning on that one theme,' and why the boy
could not go to Rome and face Martha, with her own blood on his hands.
Isom's true motive, too, was plain, and the miller told it brokenly to
Steve, who rode away with a low whistle to tell it broadcast, and left
the old man rocking his body like a woman.

An hour later he rode back at a gallop to tell old Gabe to search the
river bank below the mill. He did not believe Isom dead. It was just his
feelin', he said, and one fact, that nobody else thought important--the
Brayton canoe was gone.

"Ef he was jus' scamped by a ball," said Steve, "you kin bet he tuk the
boat, 'n' he's down thar in the bushes somewhar now waitin' fer dark."

And about dusk, sure enough, old Gabe, wandering hopefully through the
thicket below the mill, stumbled over the canoe stranded in the bushes.
In the new mud were the tracks of a boy's bare feet leading into the
thicket, and the miller made straight for home. When he opened his door
he began to shake as if with palsy. A figure was seated on the hearth
against the chimney, and the firelight was playing over the face and
hair. The lips were parted, and the head hung limply to the breast. The
clothes were torn to rags, and one shoulder was bare. Through the upper
flesh of it and close to the neck was an ugly burrow clotted with blood.
The boy was asleep.

Three nights later, in Hazlan, Sherd Raines told the people of Isom's
flight down the mountain, across the river, and up the steep to save his
life by losing it. Before he was done, one gray-headed figure pressed
from the darkness on one side and stood trembling under the dips. It was
old Steve Brayton, who had fired from the cabin at Isom, and dropping
his Winchester, he stumbled forward with the butt of his pistol held out
to Raines. A Marcum appeared on the other side with the muzzle of his
Winchester down. Raines raised both hands then and imperiously called on
every man who had a weapon to come forward and give it up. Like children
they came, Marcums and Braytons, piling their arms on the rock before
him, shaking hands right and left, and sitting together on the mourner's
bench.

Old Brayton was humbled thereafter. He wanted to shake hands with Steve
Marcum and make friends. But Steve grinned, and said, "Not yit," and
went off into the bushes. A few days later he went to Hazlan of his own
accord and gave up his gun to Raines. He wouldn't shake hands with old
Brayton, he said, nor with any other man who would hire another man
to do his "killin';" but he promised to fight no more, and he kept his
word.

A flood followed on New Year's day. Old Gabe's canoe--his second
canoe--was gone, and a Marcum and a Brayton worked side by side at the
mill hollowing out another. The miller sat at the door whittling.

"'Pears like folks is havin' bad luck with thar dugouts." said Brayton.
"Some trifin' cuss took old Steve Brayton's jes to cross the river,
without the grace to tie it to the bank, let 'lone takin' it back. I've
heard ez how Aunt Sally Day's boy Ben, who was a-fishin' that evenin,
says ez how he seed Isom's harnt a-floatin' across the river in it,
without techin' a paddle."

The Marcum laughed. "Idgits is thick over hyeh," he said. "Ben's
a-gittin' wuss sence Isom was killed. Yes, I recollect Gabe hyeh lost a
canoe jus' atter a flood more'n a year ago, when Rome Stetson 'n' Marthy
Lewallen went a-gallivantin' out' n the mountains together. Hyeh's
another flood, 'n' old Gabe's dugout gone agin." The miller raised
a covert glance of suspicion from under his hat, but the Marcum was
laughing. "Ye oughter put a trace-chain on this un," he added. "A rope
gits rotten in the water, 'n' a tide is mighty apt to break it."

Old Gabe said that "mebbe that wus so," but he had no chain to waste; he
reckoned a rope was strong enough, and he started home.

"Old Gabe don't seem to keer much now 'bout Isom," said the Brayton.
"Folks say he tuk on so awful at fust that hit looked like he wus goin'
crazy. He's gittin' downright peert again. Hello!"

Bud Vickers was carrying a piece of news down to Hazlan, and he pulled
up his horse to deliver it. Aunt Sally Day's dog had been seen playing
in the Breathitt road with the frame of a human foot. Some boys had
found not far away, behind a withered "blind," a heap of rags and bones.
Eli Crump had not been seen in Hazlan since the night of the Marcum
raid.

"Well, ef hit was Eli," said the Brayton, waggishly, "we're all goin' to
be saved. Eli's case 'll come fust, an' ef thar's only one Jedgment Day,
the Lord 'll nuver git to us."

The three chuckled, while old Gabe sat dreaming at his gate. The boy had
lain quiet during the weeks of his getting well, absorbed in one aim--to
keep hidden until he was strong enough to get to Rome. On the last night
the miller had raised one of the old hearth-stones and had given him the
hire of many years. At daybreak the lad drifted away. Now old Gabe was
following him down the river and on to the dim mountain line, where the
boy's figure was plain for a moment against the sky, and then was lost.

The clouds in the west had turned gray and the crescent had broken
the gloom of the woods into shadows when the miller rose. One star was
coming over Black Mountain from the east. It was the Star of Bethlehem
to old Gabe; and, starlike on both sides of the Cumberland, answering
fires from cabin hearths were giving back its message at last.

"Thar hain't nothin' to hender Rome 'n' Marthy now. I nuver knowed
anybody to stay 'way from these mount'ins ef he could git back; 'n' Isom
said he'd fetch 'em. Thar hain't nothin' to hender--nothin' now."

On the stoop of the cabin the miller turned to look again, and then on
the last Stetson the door was closed.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Stetson, by John Fox Jr.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST STETSON ***

***** This file should be named 3024.txt or 3024.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/2/3024/

Produced by David Reed

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
