The Project Gutenberg EBook of Two New Pelycosaurs from the Lower Permian
of Oklahoma, by Richard C. Fox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Two New Pelycosaurs from the Lower Permian of Oklahoma

Author: Richard C. Fox

Release Date: December 7, 2009 [EBook #30620]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PELYCOSAURS, L. PERMIAN, OKLAHOMA ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Woodie4, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net










  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS

  MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

  Volume 12, No. 6, pp. 297-307, 6 figs.
  May 21, 1962


  Two New Pelycosaurs from the Lower Permian
  of Oklahoma

  BY

  RICHARD C. FOX


  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
  LAWRENCE
  1962

  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

  Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Henry S. Fitch,
  Theodore H. Eaton, Jr.


  Volume 12, No. 6, pp. 297-307, 6 figs.
  Published May 21, 1962


  UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
  Lawrence, Kansas


  PRINTED BY
  JEAN M. NEIBARGER, STATE PRINTER
  TOPEKA, KANSAS
  1962

  29-3001




Two New Pelycosaurs from the Lower Permian of Oklahoma

BY

RICHARD C. FOX


In the course of examining material from fissure deposits of early
Permian age collected from a limestone quarry near Fort Sill, Oklahoma,
the author recovered several tooth-bearing fragments of small
pelycosaurs. The fragments were examined, compared with descriptions of
known kinds appearing in the literature, and determined to be new genera
within the Nitosauridae (Edaphosauria) and Sphenacodontidae
(Sphenacodontia).

Appreciation is expressed to Prof. Theodore H. Eaton, Jr., for
permission to examine the collections of the University of Kansas from
Fort Sill, and for the financial assistance furnished by his National
Science Foundation grant (NSF-G8624). I am grateful both to Prof. Eaton
and Mr. Dale L. Hoyt for their suggestions regarding this manuscript.
The accompanying figures have been drawn by the author.




Family NITOSAURIDAE

=Delorhynchus priscus= new genus and new species


(_delos_, Gr., evident; _rhynchos_, Gr., neuter, nostril; _priscus_, L.,
ancient. _Delorhynchus_ is masculine because of the ending that it
acquires when transliterated into Latin.)

_Type specimen._--Fragmentary left maxilla, bearing four teeth, KU
11117.

_Referred specimens._--Fragmentary right maxilla having four teeth, KU
11118; fragmentary left maxilla having four teeth, the most posterior of
which has been broken, KU 11119.

_Horizon and locality._--A fissure deposit in the Arbuckle limestone at
the Dolese Brothers Limestone Quarry, approximately six miles north of
Fort Sill, in sec. 31, T. 4 N, R. 11 W, Comanche County, Oklahoma. These
sediments are of early Permian age, possibly equivalent to the Arroyo
formation, Lower Clear Fork Group of Texas (Vaughn, 1958: 981).

_Diagnosis._--Small; marginal teeth conical, slender and recurved at
tips; marginal tooth-row without caniniform enlargement; narial opening
enlarged and bordered dorsally, posteriorly and ventrally by maxilla;
maxilla with foramen opening laterally at posteroventral corner of
naris.

_Description_ (based on 3 maxillary fragments, see Table 1).--Each of
the maxillary fragments bears four thecodont teeth. These are conical,
slender and sharply pointed; in their distal third they are slightly
recurved, laterally compressed, and have anterior and posterior
non-serrated cutting edges. In medial aspect at their bases, the teeth
are longitudinally striated. The bases of the teeth are circular in
cross-section and are slightly bulbous. There is no caniniform
enlargement of any of the teeth, the longest tooth of each fragment
being differently placed in the series of teeth and little longer than
the others. There is no swelling on either the internal or external
surfaces of the maxillae. The teeth are in a continuous series; no
diastema or maxillary step is evident.

[Illustration: FIGURES 1-3. _Delorhynchus priscus_, lower Permian, 6
miles north of Fort Sill, Comanche County, Oklahoma. All Ã— 3.

FIG. 1. KU 11117 (type specimen), lateral view of left maxilla.
FIG. 2. KU 11118, lateral view of right maxilla.
FIG. 3. KU 11119, lateral view of left maxilla.]

The fragments have been broken along similar lines of fracture, and each
is approximately rhomboidal in shape. The maxilla encircles the
posterior border of the naris and extends dorsally above the naris to an
extent sufficient to indicate the probable exclusion of the lacrimal
bone from the narial border. At the posteroventral corner of the naris a
foramen opens onto the lateral surface of the maxilla. The opening is
the entrance to a canal that runs posteriorly above the tooth-row
throughout the length of each specimen. Beneath the naris the maxilla
extends as a broad tapering shelf, the ventral surface of which
articulates with the premaxilla. The narial rim is wide, but wider
ventrally than dorsally. The plane of the narial rim is oblique to the
lateral surface of the maxilla. The external surface of each fragment is
grooved and pitted. The ossification of each fragment appears to have
been complete.

TABLE 1.--DIMENSIONS, IN MILLIMETERS, OF THREE MAXILLARY FRAGMENTS OF
DELORHYNCHUS PRISCUS

Key:

A. Anterior height of fragment
B. Posterior height of fragment
C. Length of fragment at tooth-row
D. Dorsal length of fragment
E. Mean length of teeth
F. Anterior width of naris

============================================================
CATALOGUE NUMBER |  A.  |  B.  |  C.  |  D.  |  E.  |  F.
AND MEAN         |      |      |      |      |      |
-----------------+------+------+------+------+------+------
KU 11117         | 6.0  |  8.0 |  6.0 |  8.0 |  3.0 |  3.0
KU 11118         | 6.0  |  6.0 |  9.0 |  8.0 |  2.0 |  3.0
KU 11119         | 6.6  |  8.0 | 10.0 | 11.0 |   ?  |  4.6
-----------------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Mean             | 6.2  |  7.3 |  8.3 |  9.0 |  2.5 |  4.5
-----------------+------+------+------+------+------+------

_Discussion._--The Nitosauridae are small primitive edaphosaurs with a
moderately elongate face, sharp subisodont teeth, little development of
canines and few specializations. The jaw is of a primitive type and
articulates on a level with the tooth-row. The palatal dentition is
primitive (Romer, 1956:280). The nitosaurids are thought to be related
to the later Caseidae, and the most obvious structural similarities are
found in the postcranial skeleton (Vaughn, 1958:989). Cranial
resemblances between the families are fewer, but nevertheless indicate
that a nitosaurid-caseid relationship exists.

Vaughn (1958) described a small pelycosaur, _Colobomycter pholeter_
(Eothyrididae, Ophiacodontia) that structurally resembles the Caseidae.
This individual also was obtained from the Fort Sill locality. In
Vaughn's opinion the features of _Colobomycter_ indicate a close
relationship between eothyridids and caseids and the possibility that
the caseids may well have been of eothyridid rather than nitosaurid
derivation.

In view of this historical uncertainty of the relationships between the
Nitosauridae, the Eothyrididae and the Caseidae, it is well to consider
how the maxillary fragments described above differ from and resemble
representatives of each of these three families as reported in the
literature.

_Delorhynchus_ resembles _Colobomycter_ in size. The mean
extra-maxillary length of the undamaged teeth of the three fragments is
2.5 mm., equal to that reported by Vaughn (1958:985) for teeth about
midway in the postcanine series of _Colobomycter_. None of the teeth of
_Delorhynchus_ extends beyond the maxillary rim as far as does the
canine of _Colobomycter_ (3.5 mm.).

The teeth in both genera are conical and sharply pointed. The naris in
each is enlarged, and the lacrimal is excluded from the narial margin in
each (by inference in _Delorhynchus_.)

The differences between the maxillae of _Colobomycter_ and
_Delorhynchus_ are most striking in the lack of canines in the latter
and the correlated absence of modifications of the maxillary for support
of canines. Additionally, _Delorhynchus_ bears an infraorbital canal in
contrast to the groove in similar position in _Colobomycter_. The
recurvature of the four teeth present in the fragments of _Delorhynchus_
differs from that in the teeth of _Colobomycter_ in which only the
canine and precanine are recurved. Vaughn implies that anterior and
posterior cutting edges extend the length of the teeth in
_Colobomycter_; these are restricted to the distal third of the teeth in
_Delorhynchus_. The external surfaces of the maxillae of _Delorhynchus_
are pitted and ridged; Vaughn was unable to discern sculpturing of the
corresponding surfaces in _Colobomycter_.

_Delorhynchus_ resembles the nitosaurids in size, the shape and
sharpness of the teeth, their recurvature and the slight enlargement of
their bases, the exclusion of the lacrimal bone from the narial margin
(in _Mycterosaurus_) and the apparent lack of a special canine pair of
teeth. Resemblances to the caseids are to be noted in the enlargement of
the naris (4.5 mm. in height as opposed to 1.7 mm. in _Colobomycter_),
lack of development of canines, presence of an infraorbital canal (in
_Cotylorhynchus_) and absence of many replacement gaps in the marginal
row of teeth.

The absence of caniniform enlargement and the extension of the maxilla
dorsad of the naris exclude _Delorhynchus_ from the Eothyrididae
(Ophiacodontia) but are no bar to its inclusion in the Nitosauridae
(Edaphosauria). The marginal teeth of _Delorhynchus_ are simple and
primitive, being much like those of the nitosaurids that are described
in the literature.

The large narial opening and its posterior, dorsal and ventral enclosure
by the maxilla, the infraorbital canal, and the sculptured external
surfaces of the maxillary fragments indicate that _Delorhynchus_, in
these features at least, is close to achieving the caseid grade.




Family SPHENACODONTIDAE

=Thrausmosaurus serratidens= new genus and new species


(_Thrausmosaurus_ is formed from the neuter Greek noun, _thrausma_,
meaning fragment, and the masculine Greek noun, _sauros_, meaning
reptile. The specific name, _serratidens_, is formed from the Latin
_serratus_, meaning serrate, and the masculine Latin noun, _dens_,
meaning tooth. The specific name is used as a substantive in apposition
with the generic name.)

_Type specimen._--Fragmentary left dentary, bearing five teeth, the
most posterior of which is broken at the base, KU 11120.

_Referred specimens._--Fragmentary ?left maxilla, having two teeth, KU
11121; fragmentary left dentary having two teeth, KU 11122.

_Horizon and locality._--From the early Permian fissure deposits in the
Arbuckle limestone of the Dolese Brothers Limestone Quarry,
approximately 6 miles north of Fort Sill, in sec. 31, T. 4N, R. 11 W,
Comanche County, Oklahoma.

_Diagnosis._--Small; teeth thecodont, compressed laterally, recurved
distally, and bearing anterior and posterior cutting edges; anterior
serrations limited to recurved portions of teeth, posterior serrations
extending nearly entire length of teeth; lateral compression of teeth
more pronounced medially than laterally; bases of teeth expanded.

_Description._--The type specimen is 16 mm. long. It bears five teeth
that are implanted in a straight row. Empty sockets are present between
the first and second teeth, and the third and fourth teeth. The first
tooth is 3.0 mm. long, the middle two are each 2.5 mm. long, and the
fourth tooth is 2.0 mm. long. The fifth tooth is broken off at its base.

The empty sockets are large. The mouth of each is circular and
approximately 2.0 mm. in diameter. Both sockets are 1.25 mm. deep. The
bases of the teeth are expanded to fill the sockets, although the blades
of the teeth arise from only the lateral portions of the bases. The edge
of the dentary rises above the bases of the teeth medially, thereby
producing a small depression at the junction of each base with the
dentary bone.

The lateral compression of the teeth is pronounced but asymmetrical, in
that the lateral surface of each blade is more convex than the medial
surface.

[Illustration: FIGURES 4-6. _Thrausmosaurus serratidens_, lower Permian,
6 miles north of Fort Sill, Comanche County, Oklahoma. All Ã— 3.

FIG. 4. KU 11120 (type specimen), lateral view of left dentary.
FIG. 5. KU 11121, lateral view of ?left maxilla.
FIG. 6. KU 11122, lateral view of left dentary.]

The recurvature of the anterior cutting edges is much more severe than
that of the posterior edges, but the recurvature of both is limited to
the distal half of each tooth.

The serrations of the cutting edges are not visible to the naked eye and
are limited on the anterior edges of the teeth to those portions of the
blades that are recurved. The posterior serrations extend nearly to the
junction of the blade of each tooth with its base. The serrations tend
to be more nearly crenulate than cuspidate.

A portion of the lateral wall of the dentary surrounding the Meckelian
canal is present. The external surface of the wall is gently convex and
smooth, without sculpturing. The internal surfaces of the canal are
unmarked either by muscle scars or foramina.

The fragment is a piece from the posterior portion of the dentary, since
the decrease in height from the first tooth to the fourth is pronounced.

KU 11122, a fragment of the left dentary bearing two teeth, is 7.5 mm.
long. The anterior tooth is 3.0 mm. long; the posterior tooth is 3.5 mm.
long. The shape of the teeth and their implantation conform to the
description of the type specimen. The lateral surface of the fragment is
smooth and gently convex. What little is present of the surface
bordering the Meckelian canal is unmarked.

The ?maxillary fragment bears two teeth which are 3.0 mm. long, and
which conform in their characters to the type. The lateral, medial and
ventral surfaces of the fragment have been sheared off, so that an exact
identification of the bone is impossible. Presumably the fragment is too
deep dorsoventrally to be a piece of the dentary, and no sign of the
Meckelian canal is present.

_Discussion._--The implantation, lateral compression, recurvature and
cutting edges of the teeth borne by these fragments make clear their
sphenacodontid nature. The characters of the fragments are too few to
determine subfamilial affinities, however. That the fragments are the
remains of adult animals can be only surmised from the lack of bones or
teeth of large pelycosaurs in the extensive collections of the
University of Kansas from the Fort Sill locality.

If _Thrausmosaurus_ is, in fact, adult, the genus is an unusually small
sphenacodontid, and of significance both on that account and because of
the resemblance of the teeth presently known to those of its far larger
relatives.

_The Fort Sill Locality._--Peabody (1961) suggested that the fissures of
Fort Sill had been used as dens by predatory animals in the early
Permian, and that the unusually abundant bones in the fissures were the
remains of animals eaten there by these occupants. Evidence now known to
me affords an alternative explanation that is presented here as a
preliminary to a more complete study of the fauna and paleoecology of
these deposits currently being undertaken.

The suggestion that the skeletal material found in the fissures is the
remnant of the prey of other animals is questionable because of:

     1. The absence of tooth marks on the fossils.

     2. The recovery from the matrix of skulls and portions of
     articulated skeletons that are undamaged or damaged only by
     pressure after burial.

     3. The rarity in the deposits of animals of larger body size than
     _Captorhinus_, the exceptions being a few limb fragments and skull
     fragments of labyrinthodont or pelycosaurian nature.

     4. The absence of coprolites in the matrix.

If the fissures were the dens of predators, at least some and probably
many of the bones would show tooth marks. A predator feeding on other
animals would be expected to leave some evidence of its habits on the
bones of its prey. No such evidence is known to me, either from my own
examination of several thousand bones or from the reports in the
literature by others who have studied aspects of the early Permian fauna
of Fort Sill.

If the predators were larger than _Captorhinus_ and occupied the
fissures for a long enough time to account for the accumulation of the
tremendous numbers of individuals that are represented, a considerable
amount of the skeletal material of the larger animals would be present
in the fissure deposits. Even if for some reason the predators died in
areas other than within the fissures, thereby accounting for the absence
of large bones, coprolites should appear in the deposits if, in fact,
the fissures were feeding places. In view of the nearly undamaged
condition of many of the bones recovered from the fissures, it is
reasonable to expect that fecal material would be preserved.

The character of the matrix of the deposits varies from a homogeneous
clay to clay interrupted by layers of soft, limey, conglomeratic rock,
to a hard, well-cemented, calcareous conglomerate. In general the bone
in each kind of matrix is colored characteristically and exhibits a
characteristic degree of wear. The bones entrapped in the homogeneous
clay are relatively few, black, usually disarticulated, little worn and
not unduly fragmented; consequently the discovery of undamaged limb
bones, for example, from this kind of matrix is not unusual. The bones
found in the stratified portion of the matrix are more numerous within
the layers of conglomerate than between. The bones are black, brown or
white, highly fragmented and waterworn to a variable degree. The
fragments recovered from the hard, calcareous matrix are numerous, range
in color from white through various shades of brown, to black, are
highly fragmented, and are usually worn by water.

These categories for bone and matrix, however, are not mutually
exclusive, since bones of any of these colors and exhibiting any degree
of wear and fragmentation are found in any of the kinds of matrix
described above. That water was the agent of wear is suggested by the
highly polished appearance of the worn bones and pebbles that are found
in the matrix.

The variability of the matrix and of the color and condition of the
bones indicates that the agencies of burial and fossilization differed
from time to time and that the agency of transportation of the bones
from the site of burial to the fissures was running water. One can
easily visualize a stream coursing the early Permian landscape that was
subject to periodic flooding and droughts. Along the banks of the stream
and in its pools lived a variety of microsaurs, captorhinids, small
labyrinthodonts and small pelycosaurs. Some of the animals, after they
died, were either buried near the site of their death or were swept
along and buried in sediments further downstream. Burial was for a
length of time sufficient to impart a color to the bones characteristic
of the site in which they were buried. Later floods reexposed the sites
of burial, picked up the bones and carried them to the openings into the
fissures. Presumably, too, a proportion of the bones was carried to the
fissures without previous burial.

The differences in wear exhibited by different bones within the same
block of matrix is attributable to differences in distance that the
bones were transported before final deposition. The final sites of
deposition, the fissures, were inundated occasionally by floods alone,
or because of changes in location of the channel of the stream at the
time of flooding. The periodicity of deposition of the sediments within
portions of the fissures is indicated by the stratification of the bone
conglomerate mentioned earlier.

In summary, it seems that there is little or no evidence beyond the
numbers of bones involved to support the hypothesis that the
concentration of bones in the fissures of Fort Sill represents the
remains of food of predators, and that the fissures were used as dens by
their predatory occupants. On the contrary, the evidence indicates that
the deposition of the bones in the fissures was secondary and that the
agency of transportation, deposition and accumulation of the bones was
an early Permian stream characterized by periodic flooding.




LITERATURE CITED


PEABODY, F. E.
   1961. Annual growth zones in living and fossil
         vertebrates. Jour. Morph. 108 (1): 11-62, 69 figs., January.

ROMER, A. S.
   1956. Osteology of the reptiles. The University of Chicago
         Press, Chicago, xxi + 772 pp., 248 figs.

ROMER, A. S., and PRICE, L. I.
   1940. Review of the Pelycosauria. Geol.
         Soc. America, Spec. Pap., 28: x + 538 pp., 71 figs., 46 pls.,
         8 tables, December 6.

VAUGHN, P. P.
   1958. On a new pelycosaur from the lower Permian of
         Oklahoma, and the origin of the family Caseidae. Jour. Paleont.,
         32:981-991, 1 fig., September.

_Transmitted March 15, 1962._





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Two New Pelycosaurs from the Lower
Permian of Oklahoma, by Richard C. Fox

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PELYCOSAURS, L. PERMIAN, OKLAHOMA ***

***** This file should be named 30620-8.txt or 30620-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/6/2/30620/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Woodie4, Joseph Cooper and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
