The Project Gutenberg eBook, Puss in Boots, Jr., and the Good Gray Horse,
by David Cory, Illustrated by E. Jones Babcock


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Puss in Boots, Jr., and the Good Gray Horse


Author: David Cory



Release Date: June 24, 2010  [eBook #32964]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUSS IN BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD
GRAY HORSE***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Shell, Emmy, and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 32964-h.htm or 32964-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32964/32964-h/32964-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32964/32964-h.zip)





PUSS IN BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE

by

DAVID CORY


[Illustration]

          _Little Tom Thumb with his tiny spear
             Follows Puss Boots both far and near.
           Did you ever see such a brave little cat,
             With a shiny sword and a feathered hat?_

[Illustration]

          _"Faster, faster, Good Gray Horse,
               Hasten swiftly on your course,
            'Till I see the stately towers
               Where my father spends his hours."_

[Illustration]

          _"Grandmother Goose your trusty broom
               Makes spick and span each cottage room,"
            Said little Puss Boots, doffing his hat,
               For he was a most polite little cat._

[Illustration]

          _This funny gnome is puzzled quite
             Why little Puss Junior is so polite.
           But Puss has manners very grand
             I would have everyone understand._


PUSS IN BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE

[Illustration: THE GOOD GRAY HORSE RUNS AWAY WITH PUSS JUNIOR AND THE
LITTLE OLD MAN.

_Puss-in-Boots Jr. and the Good Gray Horse._ _Frontispiece._]


PUSS IN BOOTS, JR.

AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE

by

DAVID CORY

Author of
Little Jack Rabbit Books,
Little Journeys to Happyland,
Puss in Boots Books, Etc.

[Illustration]

Profusely Illustrated







Grosset &amp; Dunlap
Publishers      New York
Made in the United States of America

Copyright, 1921, by Harper &amp; Brothers
Printed in the United States of America
G-V




CONTENTS


                                         PAGE
          THE MAGIC WINGS                   1
          THE HOLD-UP                       6
          WILLOW TREE INN                   9
          THE ROBBER FAIRIES               12
          BICYCLE PUSS                     15
          PUSS RECOVERS HIS STEED          18
          GEORGY PORGY                     21
          A JOLLY GALLOP                   23
          THE RUNAWAY                      26
          HUMPTY-BUMPTY                    29
          THE HAYMOW                       32
          CHAUFFEUR TAFFY                  35
          THREE LITTLE KITTENS             37
          MR. RAT                          40
          A BIG TUMBLE                     43
          HUNGRY KITTENS                   46
          KITTENS WASH MITTENS             49
          PIE FOR MRS. MOUSE               52
          SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE          54
          DOCTOR FOSTER                    57
          A MISCOUNT                       60
          PLUM PUDDING STORY               64
          "ONE I LOVE, TWO I LOVE"         67
          LITTLE JENNY WREN                69
          THE MISCHIEVOUS RAVEN            71
          CANDY TOWN                       73
          THE BRAMBLE-BUSH MAN             76
          DAFFY-DOWN-DILLY                 78
          "DONKEY, DONKEY, OLD AND GRAY"   81
          "TICK, TACK, TOO"                84
          LULLABY BABY                     87
          THE FIRE                         90
          THE OLD WOMAN'S RIDDLE           93
          THE COBBLER                      95
          DOCTOR DRAKE                     98
          "NO BIGGER THAN MY THUMB"       101
          TELL-TALE-TIT                   104
          ON THE WAY                      106
          LITTLE BOY BLUE                 109
          ALPHABET TOWN                   112
          LUCY LOCKET                     114
          TOM, THE PIPER'S SON            117
          OLD DAME TROT                   119
          BOBBY SHAFTO                    121
          LITTLE ROBIN REDBREAST          124
          THE ELF CHILD                   127




PUSS IN BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE




THE MAGIC WINGS


ONE morning as little Puss, Junior, on his Good Gray Horse rode through
Mother Goose country he saw a spider sitting in her tiny lace house. She
kept very still, for the early dewdrops still clung to the delicate web.
And as the sun shone down they looked for all the world like diamonds on
a piece of lace. So little Puss, Junior, stretched out his paw and,
would you believe it, instead of a drop of water he picked off a real
diamond.

"Ha, ha!" cried the little black spider. "The witch's feather in your
hat has changed the dewdrop into a diamond. But I have no use for
precious stones, so you may have it. The flies that come to my net are
more to my liking." And then she tied the strings of her little black
bonnet and put on her black silk mitts and waited for a fly to make a
call.

Well, after putting the diamond in his pocket, Puss rode away, and by
and by, after a while he came to a steep hill. And, oh, dear me! it was
a dreadfully steep hill, for Puss had missed his way and there was no
path or road for him to follow. And while he waited, not knowing what to
do, he heard a little voice say:

          "If I bring four wings to you
           To fasten on your horse's shoe
           Will you give me for my locket
           The sparkling diamond in your pocket?"

"How do I know my Good Gray Horse can fly with these wings?" asked Puss.

"He may try them first," said the voice, and out from behind a stump
jumped a little dwarf, dressed in green, with a red turban on his head.
Quick as a wink he fastened a wing to each foot of the Good Gray Horse.
And then he clicked his tongue against his teeth and away went the Good
Gray Horse up in the air like a great bird.

"Hold on!" shouted the dwarf. "Don't forget to give me the diamond," and
he held out his little hat for Puss to drop it in as the Good Gray Horse
sailed away on his winged feet over the mountain.

Well, as soon as he crossed the top of the great high mountain he came
down to earth and, strange to say, as soon as he touched the ground the
wings on his feet changed into long, silky hairs, and, but for these, he
was just the same as he was before meeting the dwarf.

[Illustration]

"Come, little master, since I have lost my wings, to yonder inn. I am
hungry for oats." So Puss rode forward and, after leaving him in the
stable, sat down in the inn and waited for his dinner. Pretty soon a
little bird settled on the window sill and sang:

          "From my snug little nest in the old apple tree,
             All covered with blossoms so fair,
           I never have seen, though I'm over thirteen,
             A horse that could fly thro' the air."

Just then the innkeeper's wife came in, and when she saw the little bird
on the window sill close to Puss, Junior, she cried, "Time for little
birds to be in their nests." So the little bird flew away, and as soon
as Puss had eaten his dinner he again mounted his Good Gray Horse. After
a while he met an old man and a little dog. The little dog was carrying
a basket in his mouth and the little old man a big pipe, from which the
smoke curled up in the shape of a bird. All of a sudden he gave a puff
and, would you believe it, a glossy gray pigeon flew away.

Pretty soon the smoke again curled up from the pipe into the form of a
pigeon, and then, just as before, the little old man gave a puff, and
away flew a pigeon, only this time it was grayish blue.

I don't know how long this would have gone on if the little old man had
not suddenly turned around.

"You have a wonderful pipe," said little Puss, Junior. "I've never seen
one like it."

"There are lots of strange things in Mother Goose Land," answered the
little old man. "If you are a traveler, as I think you are, you will
meet with many strange adventures."

Then with a bow he turned in at the gate of a little pink-and-blue
cottage, at the rear of which stood a pigeon house on top of a tall
pole. As Puss turned around for a last look, again the smoke from the
little old man's pipe changed into a pigeon, which flew straight toward
the little pigeon house.

Well, after that Puss rode along for some time, and by and by the moon
came out and dimly lighted the road, which now led through a forest. It
was very quiet, except for the tooting of an owl or the cry of a tree
toad.

Little Puss commenced to whistle when, all of a sudden, the Good Gray
Horse jumped to the side of the road, and there, right in front of him,
stood a tiny fairy, dressed in green. "Halt, Sir Cat!" he cried, waving
his silver wand.




THE HOLD-UP

          "OH, who is so merry, so merry, heigh ho!
             As the light-hearted fairy, heigh ho, heigh ho!"


As soon as the little fairy I mentioned in the last story finished his
song Puss, Junior's, Good Gray Horse stood up on his hind legs, for he
wasn't used to these little people of the forest, you see.

"Whoa, my good steed," cried Puss. "Don't you see it's only a little
fairy?"

"Only a little fairy!" cried the forest fay. "I would have you
understand, Sir Cat, that I have at my command a million subjects. I
have but to sound a call upon my silver horn and they will surround
you."

"Bah!" cried Puss, scornfully. "I have no fear of such tiny things."

But, oh, dear me! no sooner had he said this than the fairy blew a
shrill blast upon his silver horn, and from all directions came
thousands of little fairies on moth millers and fireflies. And, oh, dear
me! again, before Puss knew what was going to happen they stretched tiny
ropes about his Good Gray Horse and bound his legs fast, and after that
they tied Puss to the saddle.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the little fairy. "Now, my good Sir Cat, will you
believe that fairies have power?"

"Gid-ap!" cried Puss, but his good gray steed could move neither head
nor foot. "Gid-ap!" he cried again; but his Good Gray Horse could move
neither ears nor tail.

"Gracious me!" exclaimed Puss. "I'm in a pretty mess!" And then the
fairies began to sing:

          "Pride must ever have a fall.
           Ne'er despise the weak and small.
           Only he who's brave and good
           Shall pass safely through this wood."

"I don't see how that applies to me," cried Puss, stoutly. "I may have
been a trifle rude, but I maintain I'm brave and good."

Well, just then, all of a sudden, a big kind-hearted owl flew down from
his nest in a tree and cut all the fairy ropes with a big pair of
scissors. And then he gave a great hoot, which so frightened the fairies
that they flew away, helter skelter, into the depths of the forest.

"You have been very kind to me," said Puss. "How shall I repay you?"

"Forget it," said the owl, taking off his gold-rimmed spectacles and
wiping his left eye with a yellow silk handkerchief. "If you would get
safely out of this forest,

          "Follow the path, the moon is still bright.
           Take the first turn--the one to the right.
           The Willow Tree Inn you'll find in due course,
           Where you'll find shelter for you and your horse."

"Thank you," said Puss. "If your directions are as good as your rhyme I
shall have no trouble in finding the place."




WILLOW TREE INN


THE moonlight shone brightly on the sign of the Willow Tree Inn as Puss
reached up for the big brass knocker. But he wasn't tall enough, so he
stood on an empty flower pot and rapped twice on the door.

"Who's there?" asked the innkeeper, poking his head out of the window.

"Puss in Boots, Junior."

"Very well, Master Boots," said the innkeeper. "Rest on the porch till I
put on my boots." And pretty soon the door opened and the sleepy
innkeeper appeared with a lighted candle in his hand. "Ah, you have a
horse," he said. "Come, I will show you the way to the stable."

"Bad luck," cried the innkeeper, as a gust of wind blew out the candle.
"The moon is behind a cloud. 'Tis dark. Can you make your way?"

"Never fear," replied Puss. "A cat can see in the dark."

But, goodness me! just as they reached the barn a bat knocked off Puss,
Junior's, hat.

          "Bat, bat, come under my hat
            And I'll give you a slice of bacon,
          And when I bake I'll give you a cake,
            If I am not mistaken,"

cried the innkeeper.

[Illustration]

"That sounds mighty good to me," said Puss, Junior. "I've had no supper
yet, and it's nearly morning."

"So it is," answered the innkeeper. "Well, we'll give your Good Gray
Horse a mess of oats and some hay. After that we'll go back to the inn
and cook a slice of bacon."

"And when you bake please give me a cake, or I'll be much disappointed,"
cried Puss.

"I'd rather give it to you than to that old bat," said the innkeeper,
closing the stable door and pushing in the bolt. "Of course, he catches
lots of mice, but at the same time I don't like him."

"So you like me better?" said Puss.

"Well, we'll wait and see," said the innkeeper. "In the meantime, come
in." And he opened the door and led Puss into the kitchen.




THE ROBBER FAIRIES

          "COCKS crow in the morn
             To tell us to rise,
           And he who lies late
             Will never be wise;

          "For early to bed
             And early to rise
           Is the way to be healthy
             And wealthy and wise."


"Well, I haven't been to bed at all," said Puss. "I was held up in the
forest."

"What!" exclaimed the innkeeper. "I had no idea there were robbers
about."

"There were no robbers, my good host," said Puss. "You would hardly
believe me if I were to relate what actually happened."

"Tell me," said the innkeeper, "while I fry the bacon."

So Puss explained how the fairies had made him captive, although he
feared that the good man would doubt the truth of the story. But,
instead, the innkeeper said:

[Illustration]

"'Tis not the first time, my good Sir Cat, that I have heard of
travelers being held up in yonder woods by the fairies. Indeed, they
take a mischievous pleasure in waylaying us mortals after sundown."

"Indeed!" said Puss. "Hereafter I shall take great pains to avoid the
forest after dark. I had a narrow escape."

Well, pretty soon the innkeeper placed the food upon the table and he
and Puss sat down to eat. But, oh, dear me! they had hardly commenced
when they heard a great commotion in the barnyard. Puss rushed to the
door just in time to see his Good Gray Horse gallop out of the stable
yard with more than a hundred fairies on his back, who drove sharp
little thorns into his sides and blew tiny horns in his ears.

"Whoa!" screamed Puss, rushing out-of-doors. The Good Gray Horse,
terrified by the cries of the fairies as well as excited by the stings
and blows, paid no attention to the voice of his small master, but
dashed out upon the highway, and in a few minutes disappeared down the
hill.

"What shall I do?" cried Puss, in dismay.




BICYCLE PUSS


"IF I had a horse in the stable I'd lend him to you," said the
kind-hearted innkeeper.

"Have you an automobile?" asked Puss.

"Not yet," replied the innkeeper. "But I have a bicycle which I will
lend you."

It took Puss but a moment to mount, and then off he went to catch his
Good Gray Horse, who, you remember in the last story, had been stolen by
the fairies.

But, oh, dear me! although it was early morning it seemed as if
everybody was up and out for a walk. First, an old rooster stood right
in the middle of the road and crowed:

          "Cock-a-doodle do,
           Your horse has lost a shoe."

"Where is it?" asked Puss, stopping as quickly as he could, while the
good-natured rooster hopped into the long grass and picked it up.

"Thank you," said Puss, hanging the shoe over his handlebar and setting
off once more.

But, oh, dear me! again, he had gone but a short distance when a
curly-tailed pig got right in his way, and of course Puss had to slow
up.

"If you're looking for a runaway horse, you'd better take the lane to
your right," said the pig, with a grunt and a twist of his curly tail.

So Puss set off again. But, oh, dear me! for the third time, just in
front of him was a big, fat cow who had to walk very carefully not to
touch the fence rails on either side of her. Puss rang his bell, but she
paid no attention to him whatever. She kept right on, swinging her tail
from side to side to brush off the flies. And maybe Puss never would
have passed her if she hadn't all of a sudden, with a loud moo, trotted
into a meadow spread over with butter-cups.

Well, after a little way, Puss almost ran into a big load of hay, and if
the farmer had kept on going down the road instead of turning into a
gate, I guess Puss would have never caught up with his Good Gray Horse.

"Gracious me!" said Puss, when the road was clear, "I must make up for
lost time." But just then a big black crow, who was sitting on a fence
post, called out:

          "Where are you going so fast, Sir Cat?
           Look out, or the wind will blow off your hat."

And he flew off the fence and settled on the handlebar.

"Oh, don't worry! You'll get him, all right," said the crow when Puss
told him what a hard time he was having to overtake his Good Gray Horse.
"I saw him go by a few minutes ago. He looked pretty tired." And then
the old black bird flew away to tell Mrs. Crow that he had seen a pussy
cat in boots riding a bicycle.




PUSS RECOVERS HIS STEED

          THE girl in the lane, that couldn't speak plain,
            Cried, "Gobble, gobble, gobble!"
          The man on the hill, that couldn't stand still,
            Went hobble, hobble, hobble!


"Goodness me!" exclaimed Puss, Junior, as he mounted the bicycle which
the kind owner of the Willow Tree Inn had lent him, "I can't understand
a word the girl says. I asked her if she had seen my Good Gray Horse and
she answers, 'Gobble, gobble, gobble!'" And then little Puss gave a
great sigh, for it's pretty hard luck to have your horse stolen while
asleep in a strange inn, although it's mighty lucky to have the
innkeeper lend you his bicycle.

Well, after a while and many a mile, the road began to wind up a hill,
so Puss got off and pushed his wheel ahead until by and by he met a
little old man. He held a stick in both hands, on which he leaned as he
hobbled along.

"Did you see a runaway horse?" asked Puss.

"I did, indeed, my good Sir Cat," answered the hobble-hobble man. "He
went by but a few minutes ago. There were fairies on his back. I
thought at first I must be dreaming, till I remembered once before in my
life seeing a swarm of fairies, if I might use the word, from yonder
forest in hot pursuit for a bold robber who had waylaid a traveler."

[Illustration]

"Thank you," said Puss. "I must catch up with them, for the horse
belongs to me, and this bicycle is a poor substitute."

"Yes, I should think as much," replied the hobble-hobble man. "But how
are you going to catch him? Those forest fairies are mischievous, and
you will need to pedal fast and furious to overtake them."

"Never fear," replied Puss, stoutly. "I have a good pair of legs." And,
jumping on his bicycle, he went up the hill at a great rate. On reaching
the top he was delighted to see his Good Gray Horse going down the road
to the valley.

"Here's where I overtake them," cried Puss, placing his feet on the
coasters. "My bicycle can go downhill faster than a horse. In a few
moments I'll again be astride my faithful steed."

The dust flew out in a cloud behind him as he swiftly coasted down the
steep road. Ting-a-ling, ting-a-ling! went his bell as he came nearer
and nearer. "Gid-ap!" cried the fairies, but the Good Gray Horse was
tired. He had gone many miles at a gallop.

"Whoa!" cried Puss.

"Gid-ap!" cried the fairies.

But Puss was now close to them. Standing up on the bicycle seat, he made
a wonderful jump and landed squarely on the saddle of his Good Gray
Horse. And then, with a scream of dismay, the fairies flew away.




GEORGY PORGY


NOW let me see. In the last story Puss had taken his Good Gray Horse
away from the fairies, but didn't know what to do with the bicycle which
he had borrowed from the owner of the Willow Tree Inn! "I can't very
well ride it and lead my horse," said Puss to himself, "nor can I very
well ride my horse and lead the bicycle. What shall I do?"

A short distance off stood a small red schoolhouse and just then through
the open door came a merry crowd of children. All of a sudden a little
boy with a piece of plum pudding in one hand and a piece of pie in the
other ran swiftly toward Puss.

          Georgy Porgy, pudding and pie,
          Kissed the girls and made them cry.
          When the boys came out to play
          Georgy Porgy ran away

And after him came a number of boys in hot pursuit. "Please help me get
away from these boys!" cried Georgy Porgy.

"What have you done?" asked Puss.

"Oh, I kissed the girls and made them cry," answered Georgy Porgy, "but
it didn't hurt them."

"How do you know?" asked Puss.

"Kisses don't hurt," replied Georgy Porgy.

"But if these boys ever catch me"--looking fearfully over his
shoulder--"they'll give me an awful beating and take away my pie."

"Do you know where the Willow Tree Inn is?" asked Puss, all of a sudden.

"Yes, siree--," answered Georgy.

"Quick!" cried Puss. "Get on this bicycle and take it to the innkeeper.
He lent it to me."

But, oh, dear me! the boys were now close at hand and Georgy Porgy had
only time enough to give Puss the pie and pudding. "Take 'em," he said,
"I sha'n't have time to eat 'em. I can't eat and ride at the same time!"

"Go it!" shouted Puss, and, goodness me! how that bicycle did go!

"Stop! Stop!" yelled the boys.

"Go it!" screamed Puss. "Don't let them catch you!"

And Georgy Porgy didn't! No, siree! Then all of a sudden the recess bell
rang, and of course the boys had to turn back.

"I think I'll be jogging along, too," said Puss to himself. "They might
throw a stone at me for helping Georgy." And he galloped past the
schoolhouse and was soon out of sight.




A JOLLY GALLOP


"WELL, well, well!" cried Puss, Junior, to himself, as he pulled in his
Good Gray Horse after leaving the little red schoolhouse far behind. "It
was lucky for me that Georgy Porgy happened to come my way. Otherwise,
how would I have been able to return the bicycle to the innkeeper?" And
after that he walked his horse until he came to a stream, on the banks
of which stood an old mill. The mill pond was rimmed with overhanging
willow trees, and the water trickled over the dam with a soft, gurgling
noise. Through the sluiceway the water ran in a swift stream, turning
the old wheel around and around.

Puss dismounted, and after his horse had taken a drink he cropped the
fresh green grass, while Puss lay down in the shade.

          "Margaret wrote a letter,
             Sealed it with her finger,
           Threw it in the dam
             For the dusty miller.
           Dusty was his coat,
             Dusty was the siller,
           Dusty was the kiss
             From the dusty miller.
           If I had my pockets
             Full of gold and siller,
           I would give it all
             To my dusty miller."

[Illustration]

Goodness me! Puss must have fallen asleep in the shade of the old willow
tree. It was a sleepy place, and the water trickling over the dam made
one dream of silver fishes! Puss rubbed his eyes and listened:

          "If I had my pockets
             Full of gold and siller,
           I would give it all
             To my dusty miller."

"Would you really?" asked Puss, looking up at a pretty girl leaning
against a tree close by. It was she who had sung this little song, you
see.

"Oh, dear me! I thought I was all alone," she sighed.

"So did I," said Puss, "until you woke me."

"Were you asleep?" asked the pretty girl.

"Asleep and dreaming," answered our small hero.

"So was I--I mean I was dreaming," said the pretty girl, in a low voice.

"Yonder stands my Good Gray Horse. Would you like to ride with me?"
asked Puss.

"Yes, indeed," replied the girl, quickly. "Take me for a jolly gallop."
And the next minute she and Puss, Junior, were racing down the road.




THE RUNAWAY

          "MERRY are the bells, and merry would they ring;
           Merry was myself, and merry could I sing;
           With a merry ding-dong, happy, gay, and free,
           And a merry sing-song, happy let us be.

          "Merry have we met, and merry have we been,
           Merry let us part, and merry meet again;
           With our merry sing-song, happy, gay, and free,
           And a merry ding-dong, happy let us be."


"Whoa!" cried Puss, Junior, pulling in his Good Gray Horse.

"You've given me a lovely ride," said the pretty girl. "It is more than
a mile from the mill. I live just over there," pointing to a cottage on
the hillside.

"Shall I take you up to the gate?" asked Puss. "No, I'll get off here,
thank you," she replied, "and I shall never forget how nice you've been.
I was quite unhappy before you spoke to me at the old mill pond."

          "Merry have we met, and merry have we been,
           Merry let us part, and merry meet again,"

said Puss, stretching out his paw.

"How well you remember my song!" said the pretty girl, waving her hand
to Puss as he rode away.

[Illustration]

He had gone but a short distance when he heard the clatter of hoofs.
Looking back, he was startled to see a horse and wagon come tearing down
the road.

"A runaway!" he exclaimed, quickly drawing to one side. In a few minutes
the frightened horse rushed by. In the wagon was a little old man,
clinging tightly to the reins and with great difficulty keeping his
horse in the middle of the road. In an instant Puss set off in pursuit.
Pretty soon his Good Gray Horse drew close to the wagon. "Don't give
up!" cried Puss. "Hold on tight!" The little old man did his best, but
by this time his horse had become unmanageable and, turning suddenly to
the right, dashed up a steep bank. With a snap, the harness broke and
away went the frightened animal.

"Let the pesky brute go," exclaimed the old man. "He'll get tired of
running and come home by and by."

"You may have my horse," cried Puss. And in a few minutes the harness
was mended and Puss and the little old man drove off down the road.




HUMPTY-BUMPTY


HUMPTY-BUMPTY, bump! went the wagon, as the Good Gray Horse trotted
along. "Very poor springs on this wagon," cried Puss, his teeth knocking
together as they crossed a rough bit of road.

"You are not used to farm wagons, my good Sir Cat," the little old man
replied.

"You are right," said Puss.

"Did you ever hear the conundrum in rhyme about

          "'Thirty white horses upon a red hill,
              Now they tramp, now they champ,
            Now they all stand still'?"

asked the little old man.

"No," replied Puss. "But who ever saw a red hill?"

"Ha, ha!" laughed the little old man, showing how very few teeth he had
to chatter. "Why, the thirty white horses are your teeth, and the red
hill is your gums. Ha, ha!"

"He, he!" laughed Puss. "Gid-ap, my Good Gray Horse. Let us rattle the
thirty white horses upon a red hill, let them tramp and champ, but never
stand still!" And away went the wagon clattering after the Gray Horse,
bumpty-bumpty, bump!

"Hold on!" cried the little old man. "If I have but few teeth, I have
old bones! Do you wish to shake me to bits?"

"Whoa!" cried Puss, but the Good Gray Horse evidently thought it great
fun, for on he went at a still faster clip. The boards in the bottom of
the wagon flew up and down and the wooden seat swayed back and forth. Up
and down, bumpty-bumpty, bump! went the little old man.

"Pull him in!" he cried. "Pull on the lines! Don't let your horse run
away!"

Puss tugged at the reins, but the Good Gray Horse had the bit between
his teeth. He stuck out his head and tail and let his feet fly. Over the
stones bumped the wagon, up on one side and then down on the other. Poor
Puss had all he could do to keep from falling out, and the little old
man clung to the side boards and cried, "Pull on the lines!"

"I am," panted Puss, "but it doesn't do any good."

"Pull harder!" yelled the little old man.

"Can't," replied Puss, now breathless from the bumping of the wagon.
"Can't pull one little bit harder."

"Turn him in yonder lane!" screamed the little old man. "That's my lane!
It leads into the barnyard."

Well, it was mighty lucky that Puss managed to turn up the lane, and in
another moment they were racing into the yard, but before Puss could
stop him the Good Gray Horse went head first into the haymow and
headlong over the dashboard went Puss and the little old man.




THE HAYMOW


IT was a mighty lucky thing that the Good Gray Horse in the last story
ran into the haymow instead of the corncrib. Well, as soon as Puss
picked himself up the Good Gray Horse pulled his head out of the haymow.
He had gone in quite deep, for he was going at a great rate, and it's a
wonder he didn't go right through the great mound of hay.

"Whew! Miew!" cried Puss, pulling wisps of hay out of his hair and
dusting off the tops of his red boots. "That was a pretty sudden stop!"

"Yes, but it turned out all right," said the little old man. "It was
about the best way to stop your horse, methinks. It was lucky there was
hay in the way, I should say."

"How could you be such a bad old thing?" asked Puss, stroking the Good
Gray Horse on the nose. "The idea of your running away with us!"

The Good Gray Horse made no reply, however. He looked a little foolish,
but, beyond that, he seemed very much the same, except that his collar
was pushed up over his ears and his harness twisted about his neck.

"Well, put him in the stable," said the little old man. "We'll give him
a good bed and some oats. My own horse may show up some time this
evening--that is, if he ever gets tired of running."

[Illustration]

After the Good Gray Horse was made comfortable the little old man led
Puss, Junior, into the house.

"Mother," he called out, as he opened the door, "here is a visitor for
you."

A queer little old woman arose from her rocking chair and came forward.
"What! a cat!" she exclaimed, throwing up her hands in dismay. "John,
you know I don't like cats!"

"Then, madam," said Puss, Junior, politely, "I'll not trespass on your
hospitality," and he turned to leave.

"Not so, not so!" cried the little old man. "Mother, you don't
understand what has happened. This noble cat has done me a good turn. My
old mare ran away and he kindly hitched up his Good Gray Horse to my
wagon and brought me home."

"Ah," said the little old man's wife, "that's another story. This cat is
no ordinary cat. Let him make himself comfortable while I go and see
about supper."

But Puss still hesitated.

"You are indeed welcome," said the little old woman, peering over her
glasses to get a good look at him; "you shall stay and rest yourself,
for you have helped my good man, and whoever does my man a good turn
shall never go unrewarded."




CHAUFFEUR TAFFY


"HIGH-HO, how the winds blow!" exclaimed little Puss, Junior, as he rode
along on his Good Gray Horse toward the castle of my Lord Carabas to see
his dear father, Puss in Boots.

But New Mother Goose Land is a big country and Puss did not realize how
long a journey it was. You see, he had been seeking adventures for so
long and had traveled so far--sometimes on the back of his good friend,
Goosey Goosey Gander, sometimes in the airship whose captain was a downy
goose and the sailors four and twenty doves, and then, again, on
broomsticks and umbrellas and baskets that flew in the air with their
old women owners--that now, once more astride of his Good Gray Horse who
had carried him many a mile in Old Mother Goose Land he felt he would
soon be with his father.

Well, as Puss rode along he came to a bend in the road where an
automobile stood. It had evidently broken down, for the chauffeur was
tinkering with the machinery.

All of a sudden a blackbird perched herself on the fence along the road
and began to sing:

          "Taffy was a chauffeur, Taffy was a loafer,
             Taffy broke a tire everywhere he went.
           His master soon grew tired, Taffy he was fired;
             Taffy he was fired without another cent.

          "Taffy came to master's house; master wasn't in.
             Taffy made an awful row, kicked up such a din.
           He blew on his auto horn, blew with all his might;
             Everyone but Taffy ran away in fright."

"Whoa there!" cried Puss, Junior, and the blackbird must have thought it
was meant for her, for she stopped her song and looked at our small
hero. And of course the Good Gray Horse stopped, and Taffy--well, he
crawled out from under the automobile and scowled at the blackbird. And
this made Puss, Junior, laugh, and the Good Gray Horse cough and the
blackbird snicker, all of which made Taffy very red in the face.

"Tell-tale-tit, your tongue shall be slit," he cried, but the blackbird
clapped her wings and flew away. And after that Puss, Junior, said
gid-ap to his horse and rode off, leaving Taffy to finish mending his
automobile. And after a little while the blackbird came back and settled
herself on the head of the Good Gray Horse.

"Where are you going?" she said.

"To visit my father, Puss in Boots," replied our little hero.




THREE LITTLE KITTENS

          THREE little kittens lost their mittens
            And they began to cry,
          "Oh, mother dear, we very much fear
          That we have lost our mittens."


"I'll help you find them," cried Puss, Junior, looking in through the
door of a little green house.

"Will you?" said a little tabby cat.

"I think we lost them by the woodpile," said a little gray kitten.

"Perhaps we dropped them while playing hide and go seek," said a cute
black kitty.

"Come on, my little pussyfoots," cried Puss, Junior, with a grin. "I'm
pretty good at finding things--except people--I can't find my dear
father."

"How did you lose him?" asked the first little kitty, as they all ran
out into the back yard.

"I don't know any more than you know how you lost your mittens," replied
Puss, Junior, with a laugh.

"If you find our mittens we'll help you find your father," cried the
three little kittens. But, hunt as they might, no mittens were to be
found. Under the woodpile and back of the old well, behind the woodshed
and under the grape arbor, they hunted, but in vain.

[Illustration]

"You naughty kittens! Lost your mittens! Then you shall have no pie!"

"Mee-ow, mee-ow, mee-ow."

"No, you shall have no pie."

"Mee-ow, mee-ow, mee-ow."

"Have you looked in the barn?" asked Puss.

"No," cried the three little kittens.

"Well, that's a good place to look if you've been playing there,"
suggested Puss. So they all ran out to the barn. But just as they
entered the big door a little mouse scurried into a hole and a big gray
rat ran into the corn bin.

"Look here, little mouse, if you'll tell us whether you've seen any
mittens we won't hurt you," cried Puss. But the little mouse didn't
reply.

"My dear Mr. Rat," said Puss, Junior, speaking into a crack of the corn
bin, "if you'll tell us whether you have seen any mittens we'll promise
not to touch you." But the rat didn't answer.

"They're afraid of you," said the little black kitty.

"Then you ask them," whispered Puss, Junior.

"Did you see our mittens?" whispered the black kitty to the little
mouse.

"Yes," replied a squeaky voice. "I saw some mittens in the tool closet."
Then the little black kitty ran over to the tool closet, and pretty soon
he came dancing out on his two hind legs. "Here they are! Here they
are!" he cried, with a happy purr.




MR. RAT

           THE three little kittens found their mittens,
             And they began to cry,
          "Oh, mother dear, see here, see here!
           See, we have found our mittens."


"Thank you," said the black kitty, as the little mouse peeped out of her
house, "thank you very much for telling us where our mittens were."

"We promise never to hurt you," cried the three little kittens.

Puss, Junior, walked over to the corn bin. "Look here, Mr. Rat," he
said, in a gruff voice, "as long as you were so mean not to tell us
where the mittens were, I won't promise not to catch you."

"You'd better wait till you get the chance," replied the rat, looking
down from the top of the bin.

"Just wait till we grow up, Mr. Rat," said the three little kittens,
looking very fierce with their whiskers standing out straight from their
little fat cheeks and their tails twice their natural size. "You had
better not be too sure of yourself.

          "For many a rat who has spoken like that
             Has been caught when he least was aware.
           So you'd better look out what you are about,
             For we are three kittens who dare."

"That's the way to talk to him," said Puss, Junior, admiringly. "We'll
scare him to death, anyway."

"No, you won't," said the rat. "You don't know who I am. I'm the rat
'that ate the malt that lay in the house that Jack built.'"

"Oh, you are, are you?" said Puss. "Well, what are you doing here?"

"Making a visit," replied the rat.

"Look out," advised Puss, "or you may not find it a pleasant one."

"Nonsense!" replied the rat with a loud laugh. "Who's afraid of three
little kittens? They can't even find their mittens." Before he had time
to say another word Puss, Junior, sprang on top of the corn bin. Away
went the rat, over the barn floor, out through the open door, down the
path to the road. Puss, Junior, kicked off his red-topped boots and went
after him.

"Go it, Puss, dear!" screamed three little kittens. "Catch him!"

The ground was covered with a light fall of snow, but this made no
difference to Puss, Junior. He was a big, strong, healthy cat, and he
didn't mind running barefoot in the snow. This was not the case with
Mr. Rat, however. Very soon his feet became so cold that he could hardly
run, and before he reached the gate Puss pounced upon him.

"Look here," said Puss, fiercely, holding him down on the frozen
ground--"look here, Mr. Rat, we don't want you around here any longer.
Do you understand?"

"I'll promise to go back to Jack's house if you'll let me up."

"All right," said Puss. "Now go!" And away went the frightened rat.




A BIG TUMBLE

          "PUT on your mittens, you silly kittens,
              And you shall have some pie.
            Purr-r, purr-r, purr-r."
          "Oh, let us have the pie,
            Purr-r, purr-r, purr-r."


Mrs. Cat stood in the doorway of her little house and again she called
out, "Put on your mittens, you silly kittens."

"And I'll pull on my boots," said Puss, Junior, running back to the
barn. "My toes are almost frozen."

"Has the horrid old rat really gone?" asked the three little kittens.

"He has," replied Puss. "Didn't you see me catch him just before he
reached the gate?"

"There was so much snow flying about that we couldn't see very well,"
said the gray kitten.

"Well, I caught him, all right," replied Puss, pulling on his boots,
"but he begged me so hard to let him go that I did. He promised he'd
never come back."

"If he really is the 'rat that ate the malt that lay in the house that
Jack built' I don't believe Jack will be very glad to see him," said
the little tabby cat, pulling on her mittens.

"My paws are almost frozen," cried the little gray kitten. "I'm so glad
we have found our mittens."

"Good-by, mousie," cried the little black kitten, going up to the mouse
hole and peeping in. "We all thank you very much for telling us where
our mittens were. We're going into the house now, for mother has some
pie for us. We'll bring you out a little piece of crust in a few
minutes."

"Don't forget!" she answered, peeping out of her hole. "Bring us three
pieces, for I have two little children who are very fond of pie crust."

"You be sure to save a little piece of crust," said the black kitty to
the tabby kit, "and you, too," he said, turning to the gray kitten;
"then we'll have three pieces!"

"Let's close the barn door," said Puss, before they started off for the
house. "The little mouse may freeze if we leave it open."

It was a very big barn door that ran on little iron wheels, and it
wasn't easy to move. "Push!" cried Puss, bracing his feet against the
side of the barn.

"We can't push any harder," cried the three little kittens.

"Try again," said Puss. "Now, all together, heave ho, heave ho!" The big
door began to move. "Push!" cried Puss. "It's beginning to move."

The three little kittens did their best, and pretty soon the little
wheels went round and round, faster and faster, until all of a sudden
the big door bumped into the other end of the doorway, sending Puss,
Junior, and the three little kittens head over heels into the snow.




HUNGRY KITTENS


"GOODNESS, what a bump!" cried the little black kitty, wiping the snow
from his eyes.

"Gracious! what a bump!" said Puss, scrambling up from the ground. "I
think I felt it more than the old barn door, for I was underneath, you
see, and you were piled on top of me."

The three little kittens felt very sorry and commenced to brush the
snowflakes from his fur coat. "There's snow in your boot legs," said the
little gray kitten, standing on tiptoe and looking down Puss, Junior's,
boots. "Don't you feel it? I should think it would make you shiver."

"I'll soon find out," said Puss, pulling them off and turning them
upside down.

"Are they wet inside?" asked the tabby kitten, anxiously.

"Not very," said Puss, squinting up one eye and peering in.

"If they are," said the little black kitten, "mother will dry them for
you at the fire."

Then:

          The three little kittens put on their mittens,
          And soon ate up the pie.
          "Oh, mother dear, we greatly fear
          That we have soiled our mittens."

While Puss was busy placing his boots before the kitchen stove the three
little kittens seated themselves at the table.

[Illustration]

"Why don't you take off your mittens?" Puss asked. "I guess you're so
hungry you can't wait," he added with a laugh.

It took but a short time for his boots to dry, for there was a big,
blazing fire in the stove.

"Don't you want something to eat?" asked Mrs. Cat, coming over to Puss.
"You have very pretty boots," she continued, lifting up one and looking
at it with much admiration.

"Yes, they are nice boots," said Puss, Junior. "They were made for my
famous father, Puss in Boots. Mr. Solomon Grundy, who was born on a
Monday, made them years ago for my father. And one day, it was only last
week, when I stopped at his store, I saw a notice in his window that he
had died on Saturday and was buried on Sunday, and that was the end of
Solomon Grundy."

"Too bad," said Mrs. Cat.

"When I went into the store," continued Puss, "Mrs. Grundy took them
down from a shelf and sold them to me. Then she went across the street
to ask an old friend where my father lived, but she couldn't find
out--her friend didn't know or couldn't remember--so here I am, still
searching for my daddy."

"Too bad," said Mrs. Cat again. "I'm really very sorry. But do not give
up hope, for you will find him I am sure."




KITTENS WASH MITTENS


AFTER Mrs. Cat had powdered Puss, Junior's, toes so that they would slip
easily into his boots she turned to see what the three little kittens
were doing. They had just finished eating the pie. She had been so
interested in hearing how Puss, Junior, had found his red-top boots that
she hadn't heard them say:

          "Oh, mother dear, we greatly fear
           That we have soiled our mittens."

"What!" exclaimed Mrs. Cat. "Soiled your mittens, you naughty kittens!"

          Then they began to sigh,
            "Mi-ow, mi-ow, mi-ow."
          Then they began to sigh,
            "Mi-ow, mi-ow, mi-ow."

"Take them off at once," cried Mrs. Cat.

"We will, mother," said the three little kittens.

"I can't imagine why you kept them on," said Mrs. Cat.

"We were so hungry we didn't have time to take them off," said the
little black kitten.

"My fingers were so cold I thought I'd leave them on," cried the tabby
kitten.

"I didn't think about anything," sobbed the little gray kitten. "I just
looked at the pie, and then I forgot I had on mittens."

[Illustration]

Mrs. Cat stood with her front paws on her hips, looking first from one
little kitten to another.

"Did you ever see anything like children?" she sighed, turning to Puss,
Junior.

"My dear madam, forgive them this once. They were so excited over
finding the pie that they lost their heads."

"It's a good thing they are tied on," said Mrs. Cat, with a laugh; "they
might not be found as easily as the mittens."

The three little kittens looked very much ashamed. Then the little black
kitten ran over to the washtubs and, jumping on a stool, turned the
hot-water faucet. His mother handed him a big cake of soap, and in
another minute the other two little kittens climbed up beside him.

"What are you going to do?" asked Mrs. Cat, with a sly wink at Puss,
Junior.

"Never mind, mother, dear. Please don't look." And they commenced to
scrub their mittens. And when they had them all covered with lather they
dipped them into the water and squeezed them until the soapsuds looked
like a snow drift, and after that they all reached down and pulled out
the stopper, and when the soapy water was all gone they filled the tub
again with nice, clean water and washed the mittens all over again. But,
oh, dear me! the water was so deep that the little gray kitten wet her
little pink sleeve.




PIE FOR MRS. MOUSE

           THE three little kittens washed their mittens
            And hung them up to dry.
          "Oh, mother dear, do you not hear
           That we have washed our mittens?"


Sure enough, all the mittens were washed and neatly hung on the
clothesline. But the clothesline was so high that Puss had been forced
to climb a stepladder. The kittens had stood below, their little paws
full of clothespins, and every time Puss needed a pin one of them had
climbed up and handed it to him.

          "Washed your mittens! Oh, you're good kittens.
           But I smell a rat close by.
           Hush! Hush! mee-ow, mee-ow.
           We smell a rat close by,
           Mee-ow, mee-ow, mee-ow!"

cried Mrs. Cat.

When Puss heard this he ran around the house. I guess he expected to
find the "rat that ate the malt that lay in the house that Jack built."
But Mrs. Cat had made a mistake, for there was no rat to be seen.
Instead, there stood the little mouse who two or three stories ago had
told the black kitty where to find their mittens.

"What do you want?" asked Puss, Junior, kindly.

"I think the three little kittens have forgotten their promise to give
me three pieces of pie. I've been waiting in the barn all this time."

"Kittens!" cried Puss.

The three little kittens came tumbling around the house. But the little
mouse ran behind a tree.

"Did you forget to save some pie crust for the little mouse and her two
children?" asked Puss.

"Of course not!" replied the three kittens.

"I tucked a little piece under my plate," said the gray kitten.

"I put a little piece in the old clock," said the tabby kitten.

"And I put mine behind the big shell on the mantelpiece," cried the
black kitty.

"Go and get them," said Puss, "for Mrs. Mouse can't be kept waiting; her
babies out in the barn will be crying for her."

The three little kittens ran into the house, and pretty soon returned
with the pie crust.

"We'll carry it out to the barn for you," they cried.

So the little mouse ran ahead, and when she was safe in the barn she
waited until the kittens had placed the three little pieces of pie crust
on the floor. As soon as they had gone the little mouse came out and
carried the pie crust into her house.




SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE

          SING a song of sixpence,
            A pocketful of rye,
          Four and twenty blackbirds
            Baked in a pie.

          When the pie was opened
            The birds began to sing.
          Wasn't that a dainty dish
            To set before the king?


Well, when little Puss, Junior, heard those blackbirds singing he halted
before the castle and knocked on the gate.

"You must have a thousand canaries."

"Canaries nothing," replied the old retainer. "The King's twenty-four
blackbirds are singing."

But, goodness, gracious me! all of a sudden something happened. And it
was even worse than when the raven cried, "Croak!" and the farmer's mare
fell down and broke her knee. For just then, while

          The maid was in the garden
            Hanging out the clothes,
          Down came a blackbird
            And snapped off her nose.

[Illustration]

Perhaps he was angry because he hadn't been invited to sing for the
King. I'm sure I don't know, but, anyway, he was a mighty mean bird, let
me tell you.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" cried the poor maid, and she sat down on a garden
bench and began to weep. Just then the four and twenty blackbirds jumped
out of the pie and flew into the garden to look for that naughty bird.
But they couldn't find him. Oh, dear, no! He was far away by that time,
maybe at the North Pole of Mother Goose Land, which they tell me is a
frosted stick of sugar candy.

"Oh, what shall I do?" sobbed the maid, still holding her poor nose in
her hands.

"You had better call in the doctor," suggested Puss.

"He lives a good two miles from here," said the old retainer, "and our
telephone is out of order."

"I'll go fetch him," said Puss. "Dry your eyes, pretty maid!" And,
jumping on his Good Gray Horse, he galloped away. And the four and
twenty blackbirds flew after him so that in case the naughty blackbird
came back to nip little Puss, Junior's, nose they would be there to
protect him.




DOCTOR FOSTER

          DOCTOR FOSTER went to Glo'ster
            In a shower of rain;
          He stepped in a puddle up to his middle,
            And never went there again.


Which was a mighty lucky thing, for, goodness knows, perhaps the poor
maid never would have had her nose mended if Puss hadn't found the good
doctor at home.

Well, as soon as he learned what was the matter, he jumped up behind
Puss, and the Good Gray Horse kicked out his heels and galloped away,
and the four and twenty blackbirds trailed after them, and pretty soon,
not so very long, they came to the Blackbird-pie Castle. There sat the
poor maid in the garden, still holding her nose in her hand.

"Let's see it," said the doctor, opening his little black bag and taking
out medicine and bandages.

"I'm afraid it's half gone," sobbed the maid, "I don't want to look at
it."

[Illustration]

"But I do," said the doctor. "Otherwise, how can I mend it?" And I guess
he was right, for he was the most famous doctor in all Mother Goose
Land. Well, as soon as she took away her hand he said:

"It's not as bad as it might be. It still looks like a nose!"

"Does it?" she sobbed.

"Oh yes," said the doctor, turning to Puss and the old retainer. "You'll
hardly know the blackbird touched it after I get through."

"Maybe he only pinched it," said Puss.

"Or only tweaked it," said the old retainer.

"Perhaps he thought it was a cherry," laughed the doctor, putting on
some powder.

And then the maid began to smile. "It feels much better already," she
said.

"Well it's always a good thing to call in the doctor," said the learned
man. "You never can tell what may happen," and, picking up his little
black bag, he held out his hand. "Two shillings, please!"

"Mercy me!" she cried. "I haven't had my wages for this month."

"What did you do with last month's?" asked the doctor, but before she
could reply one of the four and twenty blackbirds dropped a gold piece
in his hand. I guess he felt dreadfully ashamed to think that one of his
brothers had pinched a pretty girl's nose.




A MISCOUNT

          THE King was in his counting-house,
            Counting out his money;
          The Queen was in the parlor,
            Eating bread and honey.


And now let us see where little Puss, Junior, was. Oh yes, I remember
now. He was in the garden of the Blackbird-pie Castle, where the poor
maid's nose had been nipped by a naughty, bad blackbird. Well, after the
good Doctor had gone, the old retainer took Puss to see the King, who
was so busy counting his money that he didn't even look up.

"Your Worship," began the retainer.

"What do you want?" asked the King, angrily. "I've just counted up to
three trillion two hundred and thirty-seven billion, nine hundred and
forty-eight million, seven hundred and fifteen thousand, four hundred
and--and--now you've gone and made me miss, and I'll have to count all
over again."

"Start off at four hundred. A few sovereigns less won't matter to a
king," said little Puss, Junior.

"I'm not so sure about that," replied His Majesty, taking off his crown
and scratching his head. "One likes to be right as well as King!"

"Nobody said, my lord!" cried the old retainer. "But consider your
health. Let's take this wise cat's suggestion and quit for the time
being."

"All right," said the King. "Let's go find the Queen."

She was in the parlor eating bread and honey. "How do you do, my dear
Puss, Junior?" she cried.

"I am very well, thank Your Majesty," he replied.

"I have just heard what valuable assistance you have rendered our
court," continued the Queen.

Puss would have blushed had not his cheeks been covered with whiskers.

"I did but do my duty, Your Majesty," he replied.

"What's that?" asked the King.

"Did you not hear, my lord?" cried the Queen. "Our maid had her nose
bitten by a naughty blackbird, and our little friend here quickly
fetched the Doctor, bringing him on his Good Gray Horse in short time."

"Indeed!" exclaimed His Majesty. "I will reward him. He shall have a
castle and a retinue."

"Your Royal Highness," exclaimed Puss, Junior, "I am overwhelmed with
your generosity, but I needs must decline your offer. For until I find
my father, the famous Puss in Boots, I may not rest upon my journey
except for sleep and refreshment."

[Illustration]

"Zounds!" exclaimed the King. "You are a gallant cat. Would that all my
subjects were as faithful to their duty as you are! But," he added,
with a smile, "you shall rest here for the night, for a good dinner and
a sound sleep will make you travel the faster on the morrow."

The Queen by this time had finished her bread and honey.

"Come out on the terrace," she suggested, "for it is cool and pleasant
there, and the flowers are very beautiful. I would show Sir Cat our
flower garden."

The King, therefore, gave his arm to the Queen and Puss gallantly held
up her train, the three walking slowly out upon the broad terrace. The
sun was quite low in the sky, for it was late in the afternoon. The big
hills to the westward seemed to hold up the sky, and Puss wondered
whether the jolly old sun would not bump himself as he slid down over
the edge of the world.

"Come, Puss dear, take my hand," said the Queen. She then went over and
sat down on a marble bench. Picking up Puss, she held him in her arms
and commenced to sing, and presently he fell fast asleep. The Queen
looked up at the King and said, "Is he not a dear little cat?" and the
King for answer took from his purse several gold pieces and tucked them
away in Puss, Junior's, pocket.




PLUM PUDDING STORY


WHEN Puss, Junior, awoke from his nap he was surprised to find himself
in the Queen's lap. It was growing dark and for a moment he wondered
where he was. "Don't ask where you are, my dear Puss," laughed the
Queen, "for you are safe and well."

"Your Majesty," said Puss, rubbing his eyes, "I was also very
comfortable. Pardon me for dropping off to sleep in your presence."

Just then a page appeared and announced that dinner was served. The King
arose and offered his arm to the Queen, Puss following quietly after. As
he stepped down the great stairway to the royal dining room he heard
some one singing in a deep voice:

          "When good King Arthur ruled this land,
             He was a goodly King;
           He stole three pecks of barley meal
             To make a bag pudding.

          "A bag pudding the King did make
             And stuffed it well with plums,
           And in it put great lumps of fat
             As big as my two thumbs.

          "The King and Queen did eat thereof,
             And noblemen beside;
           And what they could not eat that night
             The Queen next morning fried."

"Plum pudding!" said Puss to himself. "That sounds pretty nice," and he
followed the King and Queen into the great dining hall. Many noblemen
were present and the table was a most gorgeous affair. Silver tankards
and wonderful gold dishes gleamed in the candlelight. Puss was very much
impressed and behaved beautifully. And when the plum pudding came on the
table the same deep voice began to sing:

          "And what they could not eat that night
             The Queen next morning fried."

"Puss," said the Queen in a whisper, "let's finish the pudding between
us! I know you'd like some more, and so would I. Moreover," she added in
a still lower whisper, "I don't intend getting up early to-morrow
morning to fry what's left over--so let us finish it to-night."

Presently the court fool came running in, his fool's cap all ajingle
with bells. He capered about, swinging up and down a little stick which
was also covered with tiny bells. These were silver, and the ones in his
cap were of gold, so that the sound was very sweet.

The next morning Puss mounted his Good Gray Horse and rode away, and
after a while he came to a great mound of earth in which was a little
wooden door on leather hinges.

"What sort of a house is this?" thought Puss. And then, as if in answer
to his question, the door opened and there stood a big brown bear
dressed in a fur overcoat. And, oh, dear me! at first Puss was startled,
and the Good Gray Horse reared on his hind legs. But the big brown bear
didn't growl. Not even a little bit. He just smiled as only a brown bear
can, and said:

          "If you have money
           I'll sell you some honey."

So Puss jumped down and followed the bear into his hill house, for Puss
was curious to see what kind of a home this big, smiling brown bear had,
you see.

Well, I want you to know it was a mighty nice sort of a place. There was
a big fireplace with great immense crackling logs, and over it, on the
mantelpiece, were two beautiful carved candlesticks made from deers'
horns, and a cuckoo clock. And just then out came the little cuckoo
herself and began to sing.




"ONE I LOVE, TWO I LOVE"

          ONE, I love; two, I love;
            Three, I love, I say;
          Four, I love with all my heart;
            Five, I cast away.
          Six, he loves; seven, she loves;
            Eight, both love.
          Nine, he comes; ten, he tarries;
          Eleven, he courts, and twelve, he marries.


On a big stone by the wayside sat a little boy and girl. She held a
daisy in her hand, from which she slowly picked off the petals as she
counted:

"One, I love; two I love."

"Whoa!" cried Puss, Junior.

"Three, I love, I say."

Both the children looked up. "What a dandy cat," cried the little girl,
"and what a beautiful horse."

"Give us a ride?" asked the little boy.

"Do you know how to ride?" asked Puss, with a grin.

"I can ride my rocking horse ever so fast," the little boy replied.

"So can I," said the little girl.

"Stand on the stone," said Puss. "I'll ride up close, and then you both
can climb up behind me. Easy there!" cried Puss, guiding the Good Gray
Horse up to the children, who stood close together on the big high
stone. "Now climb up behind me," and in a minute the two children had
scrambled on to the saddle. "Gid-ap!" and off went the Good Gray Horse
on a canter.

"Isn't this great?" cried the little boy.

"Isn't it lovely?" said the little girl.

"One, I love; two, I love; three, I love, I say; four, I love with all
my heart," sang Puss. "There are just four of us. You two and my Good
Gray Horse and I."

"But that isn't the way," said the little girl. "You must count the
petals!"

"Oh, is that so?" asked Puss. "I like my way just the same."

"So do I," said the little boy. "All four of us are pretty good chums
already."

And the Good Gray Horse whinnied, as much as to say: "I'm a good friend.
See what I'm doing--carrying you all so nicely on my big, broad back?"

"That settles it," said Puss. "My Good Gray Horse likes it that way."

"There's our house over there," cried the little girl. "We'd better get
off here."

"All right," and Puss helped them down. "Good-by, good-by," and then the
two children ran up the path to tell mother all about it.




LITTLE JENNY WREN

          AS little Jenny Wren,
            Was sitting by her shed
          She waggled with her tail,
            She nodded with her head.
          She waggled with her tail
            And nodded with her head,
          As little Jennie Wren
            Was sitting by her shed.


"May I put up my Good Gray Horse for the night?" asked Puss, Junior.

"You may, my good Sir Cat," replied the little bird. "Hay you will find
for his supper, and straw for his bedding."

So Puss, Junior, jumped down and led his steed inside the big red barn
and, after tying him in the stall, he looked around for a pitchfork.

"What are you looking for?" asked little Jenny Wren.

"A pitchfork, my dear," announced Puss. "I must spread straw for my
horse so that he may rest comfortably, and bring in some hay from the
mow for his supper. My paws will not do, so I must ask you where I may
find the pitchfork."

"Here it is, my good Sir Cat. Now let me see you use it," answered
little Jenny Wren, flying over to the opposite side of the shed and
lighting on the handle of a large hay fork.

"Now, my little Lady Wren," cried Puss, after spreading the straw about
the stall until he had a fine bed for the horse, "show me, if you
please, the haymow, for I must give him some hay."

"I will show you the oats bin, also," said the Wren, "and here is the
measure. You must lift this little wooden slide, but see that you don't
spill the grain on the floor."

Lifting the slide ever so little, Puss held the measure carefully under
the wooden trough until it was filled. Then he carried it over to his
horse, who neighed twice, as much as to say, "Thank you."

"And now," said Jenny Wren, "what about yourself, my Lord Cat?"

"Lord Cat!" laughed Puss. "Do lords tend their own steeds? I fear the
word Sir is even out of place."

"Never mind," said little Jenny Wren, "you have the manners of a
gentleman, and that is enough for me."

"Thank you," said Puss.

"Come, follow me," cried Jenny Wren, and she led Puss into a pretty
little cottage close by. "Hang up your cap and place your stick behind
the door, and then wash your hands in my room. By that time I shall have
supper ready for you."




THE MISCHIEVOUS RAVEN

          A FARMER went trotting upon his gray mare--
            Bumpety, bumpety, bump!
          With his daughter behind him so rosy and fair--
            Lumpety, lumpety, lump!


"Can you direct me to the wise man who lives in yonder village?" asked
Puss, Junior, bowing politely to the farmer's pretty daughter.

"Whoa!" cried the farmer to his gray mare.

"Isn't he a lovely cat?" whispered his daughter.

"What did you say?" asked the farmer, looking Puss, Junior, over from
head to toe.

"I merely inquired," replied Puss, haughtily, "if you could direct me to
the wise man in yonder town?"

"Whoa!" cried the farmer as the old gray mare started off. "Whoa, there!
Can't you hear the gentleman cat addressing your master?"

"Whoa, Betsy," coaxed the farmer's pretty daughter.

"Well, Sir Cat," said the farmer, as soon as the old mare became quiet,
"we have several men in our town who think they are wise, but some of us
farmers don't quite agree with them."

And then, all of a sudden, something dreadful happened.

          A raven cried croak! And they all tumbled down--
            Bumpety, bumpety, bump!
          The mare broke her knees, and the farmer his crown--
            Lumpety, lumpety, lump!

And, oh, dear me, the farmer's pretty daughter dropped the mirror from
her vanity bag, and it broke all to smithereens and she felt so unhappy
about it that she began to cry. And then:

          The mischievous raven flew laughing away--
            Bumpety, bumpety, bump!
          And vowed he would serve them the same the next day,
            Lumpety, lumpety, lump!

"Botheration!" cried the farmer, rubbing the bump on the top of his
head. "That raven is angry because I set up a scarecrow in my
cornfield."

"Well, father," said his daughter, "our mare can't take us to town. What
shall we do?"

"You get up behind Sir Puss and ride to town," he replied. "I'll take
the mare home. That's the best way, I guess."




CANDY TOWN


PUSS, JUNIOR, helped the farmer's pretty daughter into the saddle, and
then away went the Good Gray Horse to Candy Town. Well, after maybe a
mile and a laugh and smile, Puss said, "I feel just like a Knight of the
Round Table, for I have rescued a maiden in distress." And this made the
farmer's pretty daughter laugh till her cheeks grew red as two apples.

"Well, then, I shall call you Sir Cat," she said, and this so pleased
Puss that he began to purr at a great rate. It was great fun, he
thought. And the farmer's daughter thought it great sport, too, I
imagine, for she began to sing a little song, and this is the way it
went:

          "Heigh-ho, over we go,
             Pussy and I to town,
           What does he wish? A nice little fish,
             And I a silken gown.
           But where is the money to buy all that,
           Unless I may borrow from Sir Pussy Cat?"

"Of course you may," cried Puss. "Just wait till we get to town."

And then the farmer's pretty daughter blushed very red. "I was only in
fun," she said.

[Illustration]

"But I wasn't," replied Puss.

"Why, have you enough money?" she asked, giving him a hug.

"Don't squeeze so tight," cried Puss. "We may have an accident, and one
is enough for to-day. I hope your father will get the old gray mare
home safely."

"Never fear," she replied, "father will attend to that, all right."

"Here we are," said Puss, looking up at a sign-post on which was
written, "Candy Town." "Now, where's the shop with the silken gowns?"

"Over there. Don't you see it right next to the baker's shop."

"Oh yes," laughed Puss, "I see it now," and he drew rein in front of the
quaint little shop and helped the farmer's daughter to alight.

"Come in with me," she said, "for I'd like to buy what you like." And
this so pleased Puss that he made up his mind to buy any gown she
fancied, even if it were trimmed with diamonds.

"Do you want that pretty blue one?" he asked, with a smile.

"How did you guess?" she answered. "You are a wonderful cat."

"And now," said Puss, when the gown was wrapped up, "let's have a cream
puff in the baker's next door, for I'm sure you're hungry."

"You're a wonderful guesser, Sir Puss," she cried, "indeed you are, as
well as a most generous little cat."




THE BRAMBLE BUSH MAN

          THERE was a man in our town,
            And he was wondrous wise.
          He jumped into a bramble bush
            And scratched out both his eyes.
          And when he found his eyes were out
            He cried with grief and pain,
          And jumped into another bush
            And scratched them in again.


"That's the man I'm looking for," cried little Puss, Junior. "I wonder
where he lives. Maybe he can tell me where to find my father."

"You hold your horse while I ask the baker's wife," said the farmer's
pretty daughter.

Pretty soon she came back and said: "He lives in a little house just
outside the town. It's not far from our place."

So she and Puss rode away, and she was mighty careful, let me tell you,
not to drop the package containing the silk gown which Puss had given
her.

Well, by and by they came to the wise man's little house, surrounded by
a hedge of bramble bushes; but the wise man himself was nowhere to be
seen.

"Let's go around to the barn," said the farmer's pretty daughter. "It's
milking time, you know." And, sure enough, there they found him.

"Are you the man who jumped into the bramble bush?" asked Puss.

"Yes, I am. But let me tell you something. They call me a wise man, but
I think a man who jumps into a bramble bush is a silly goose."

And then, all of a sudden, the Bramble-bush Man exclaimed: "Goodness me!
I once knew a cat who wore red-top boots. A good many years ago there
lived near here a miller who had three sons. When he died he left all
his property to the two eldest, but to the youngest only a cat. Well,
this cat turned out to be a most wonderful cat. Indeed, I heard that he
secured a magnificent castle for his young master, as well as the hand
of a lovely princess."

"Where does he live?" cried Puss, in great excitement.

"That I cannot tell," replied the Bramble-bush Man, "for I never heard
where he went after leaving here."

"Oh, dear me!" sighed little Puss, Junior. "Nobody knows where my father
lives." Then he and the farmer's pretty daughter rode away, and in the
next story you shall hear what happened at the old farmhouse.




DAFFY-DOWN-DILLY

          "DAFFY-DOWN-DILLY has come to town
             In a yellow petticoat and a green gown,"


sang the farmer's pretty daughter beneath Puss, Junior's, window. There
she stood, bending over her flower bed, the pink strings of her bonnet
floating on the morning breeze.

Puss hurriedly pulled on his boots and ran outside. "Good morning! I see
your flowers are still in bed."

"Daffy and Down and Dilly are very lazy, I fear," laughed the farmer's
pretty daughter; "they'll never get to town to buy a new gown if they
don't hurry."

"I hope they won't meet any bad crows on their journey," replied Puss.

"And I hope they won't have any bumpety bumps!" said the farmer's pretty
daughter.

Just then the farmer came out of the barn leading Puss, Junior's, Good
Gray Horse.

"Good-by," said Puss. "I've had a pleasant visit." And off he rode. By
and by, after a while, he met an old crow walking along the top of the
fence. He wore a silk hat and carried a cane, but he couldn't lean on
it, for the fence rail was so narrow, you see.

"Hello!" said Puss, Junior. And, goodness me! that well-dressed crow
nearly lost his balance, he was so startled at Puss, Junior's voice.

Well, as soon as he had caught his breath, he said:

"I have just found a beautiful pearl necklace. Do you think it belongs
to the Queen of Hearts?"

[Illustration]

"I'm sure I don't know," answered Puss. "Suppose you come along with me
and maybe we'll find the owner."

So the silk-hatted old crow sat himself down behind Puss, and the Good
Gray Horse kicked out his heels, and away they went to the next village,
and when they reached there they stopped before the office of the Mother
Goose daily newspaper and asked the man who ran the "Lost and Found"
advertisements if he knew who had lost a beautiful pearl necklace of
twenty-three pearls and a little diamond clasp?

"Let me think," he said, scratching the top of his head, which was as
bald as a billiard ball. You see, he was a bald-headed eagle, although I
forgot to mention it before.

"You might inquire at a little green house about a mile down the road. A
little yellow hen lives there who once had a coral necklace." So Puss
said gid-ap to the Good Gray Horse and rode away, and by and by, after a
while, they came to the little green house. And when the old crow
knocked on the door it was opened by the little yellow hen herself.

"Have you lost a necklace of pearls?" he asked, politely doffing his
silk hat.

"Dearie me! Let me look," she answered, hopping back into her little
house. Pretty soon she came back with a little jewel case, which was as
empty as a Christmas stocking on the Fourth of July.

"Who could have taken it out?" she said.

So the honest old crow handed over the pearl necklace, and went inside
for a cup of tea, while Puss said good-by and rode away.




"DONKEY, DONKEY, OLD AND GRAY"

          "DONKEY, donkey, old and gray,
            Open your mouth and gently bray;
          Lift your ears and blow your horn
          To wake the world this sleepy morn,"


sang little Puss, Junior.

"I'm no rooster," replied the little donkey. But he gave a gentle bray,
just the same, and then the Good Gray Horse neighed, and after that a
little adder crawled out of a hole in the ground and said:

"Gracious me! What's all this noise?" And that only goes to show what a
dreadful din it must have been, for adders are deaf, so they tell me.

Well, anyhow, Puss didn't wait any longer, but rode away, and by and by,
after a while, he met a funny little man with a sack over his back.

"What have you in your bag?" asked Puss, for he felt sorry for the
little old man and meant to give him a lift in case he had a heavy load,
you see.

"What's that to you?" asked the little old man, with a scowl. And before
you could say "Jack Robinson!" he disappeared inside a stump.

Puss jumped off his Good Gray Horse and peeped in. But he couldn't see
anything, only a big black hole. Well, he was just going to turn away
when he heard a voice say:

          "Mother, I've brought you a bag of gold
           For the little pink-and-white pig I sold."

[Illustration]

So Puss peeped in again, and pretty soon he saw a tiny light way down
deep, like the flicker of a candle. And by and by, as his eyes grew used
to the darkness, he saw a flight of stairs. Then what do you think he
did? Jump into the hollow stump and climb down? That's just what he
did, and it wasn't long before he found himself in a little hall
opposite a small door with a glass knob inside of which was an electric
light, which I suppose had been put there by the little old man in case
he got home after twelve at night and his wife had blown out the candle.

All of a sudden the door opened and a little old woman, bent and
withered, asked, in a shrill voice:

      "How dare you come down to our Hollow Stump hall?
       I'll cut off your whiskers, tail and all."

"Please, ma'am," said little Puss, Junior, "I won't tell anybody." And I
guess he would have climbed up the stairs then and there if he hadn't
feared she might cut off his tail when he turned around.

"Let him go, mother," said the little old man. "He would have given me a
ride on his horse on my way home had we met sooner." But how he knew
that is more than I can tell. "Here, Sir Cat. Take this gold piece and
tell neither man nor beast where you got it." And he pushed Puss up the
little flight of stairs.




"TICK, TACK, TOO"


ONE day Puss, Junior's, Good Gray Horse lost a shoe.

"Gracious me! I must find a smithy," said Puss, Junior, anxiously.
Luckily there was a small village near by, and pretty soon he drew rein
in front of a blacksmith shop. But, oh, dear me! there was no one there
except a small boy.

          Jack Jingle went 'prentice
            To make a horseshoe;
          He wasted the iron
            Till it would not do.

          His master came in
            And began for to rail.
          Said Jack, "The shoe's spoiled,
            But 'twill still make a nail."

          He tried at the nail,
            But, chancing to miss,
          Said, "If it won't make a nail,
            It shall yet make a hiss."

          Then into the water
            Threw the hot iron, smack,
          "Hiss!" quoth the iron.
            "I thought so," said Jack.

"You good for nothing!" cried the blacksmith, coming into the shop,
"here's a customer at hand and you have no shoe for his horse."

"How long will it take to make one?" asked Puss, Junior.

"All day and maybe longer," said the smith--"that is, if you depend on
that clumsy lad."

[Illustration]

"Well, I don't want to depend on him," said Puss, with a grin; "neither
do I want to take chances with my good horse."

"Neither shall you, my Lord Cat," replied the smith. "I will see that
your horse is well shod, for he is indeed a fine beast."

"He has good legs, has he not?" asked Puss, running his paw down the
foreleg of the big gray horse, like a professional horseman.

"He has that," said the blacksmith, "and a fine head, too."

"He's a good roadster," added Puss, seating himself on a three-legged
stool while the smith lifted the horse's leg and held it between his
knees.

"Yes, he has good feet," said the smith, "and he shall have a fine
shoe."

          Here a nail, and there a nail, tick, tack, too.

As soon as the shoe was on, Puss, Junior, mounted and rode away. But
before he left he turned to Jack and said:

          "If at first you don't succeed, try, try again.
             Tick, tack, too; learn to make a shoe!
           Some day you may turn out ten
             If you don't get blue."




LULLABY BABY

          MATTHEW, Mark, Luke, and John,
            Bless the bed I lie upon.
          Four corners to my bed,
          Five angels there lie spread;
          Two at my head,
            Two at my feet,
          One at my heart,
            My soul to keep.


Puss, Junior, looked in at the window. On a little white bed lay a
pretty child.

"Now go to sleep, my little one," softly whispered his mother. "Snuggle
down and find a little dream--a little dream about woolly lambs and
white daisies."

Then she tiptoed from the room, and no sound was heard except her
footsteps on the stairs. Just as she looked through the open door she
saw Puss slide down the post that held up the roof of the porch.

"Don't worry, madam," he explained, politely. "I climbed up to see if
anyone were at home. Nobody answered the doorbell. But when I saw your
little boy I kept very, very still so as not to disturb him."

"You are a good cat," she answered, with a sigh of relief. "I'm glad you
were quiet."

"I am very tired, madam," said Puss, "for I have journeyed far to-day.
Would it be asking too much if I might sleep on your front porch?"

"You may sleep on a big red cushion in the hall," she replied, "and I
will also give you a bowl of milk."

[Illustration]

"May I put my Good Gray Horse in your barn?"

"Of course," she answered. "You will find plenty of hay and oats for his
supper."

The Good Gray Horse followed his small master to the stable and was soon
made comfortable for the night. Then Puss locked the stable door and
brought the key into the house.

"Hang it up on the nail behind the door," said the mother of the little
child. "And take off your boots. They make so much noise on the kitchen
floor. I fear they will keep my little one awake."

"I will gladly take them off," said Puss, and he placed them behind the
door underneath the big barn key.

"My husband will be home very soon," she said, "but if you are very
tired I will give you your supper at once."

"I would like it now," said Puss, with a weary sigh. And when he had
finished he jumped upon the big red cushion and was soon fast asleep.




THE FIRE

          MY Lady Wind, my Lady Wind,
            Went round about the house to find
            A chink to get her foot in;
          She tried the keyhole in the door,
          She tried the crevice in the floor,
            And drove the chimney soot in.

          And then one night when it was dark
          She blew up such a tiny spark
            That all the house was pothered;
          From it she raised up such a flame
          As flamed away to Belting Lane,
            And White Cross folks were smothered.


Puss, Junior, awoke with a start to find his room filled with smoke.
And, oh, dear me! when he opened his door red flames were already
crawling up the woodwork.

Running up the stairs two at a time, he pounded on the nursery door and
shouted, "Fire! fire!" And then, of course, the baby awoke with a cry.

"Oh, Puss, Junior, what shall I do?" cried the mother, for the cruel
flames were now creeping across the hall.

"Don't open the door," he cried. "The hall is a mass of flames. Climb
through the window to the roof of the porch. Be quick!" and he jumped
through the little hall window and ran across the roof to the nursery.
"Come out here!" he shouted. "Be quick, or the flames will be in your
room before you can get out."

[Illustration]

Just then, all of a sudden, a ladder was placed against the porch, and a
kind fireman with a big red helmet on his head held out his arms. "Give
me the baby and follow me." Puss held the top of the ladder to steady it
until they were safe on the ground and then slid down without touching
the rungs.

"Our pretty house will be burned," sobbed the baby's mother.

"And my red-top boots," cried Puss.

"There goes the stable!" shouted the fireman.

"Goodness me!" cried Puss. "I'd better get my Good Gray Horse!"

By this time the hose was connected and soon the engine was pumping
water on the flames. But, oh, dear me! it was too late. The pretty
little house quickly burned to the ground--only the big red chimney was
left. It was hard work to save the stable, but at last the flames were
put out.

"We all must sleep in the hay loft," said Puss.

So the Good Gray Horse was led back into his stall. He was the only one
who was comfortable that night, I guess.




THE OLD WOMAN'S RIDDLE


"OH, dear me!" sighed little Puss, Junior, as he thought of his lovely
red-top boots which had been destroyed by the fire. "Where shall I get
another pair?" for he knew that no ordinary bootmaker had the skill to
make boots for a cat. However, when he mounted his Good Gray Horse he
found, to his surprise, a couple of gold sovereigns in his pocket.
"That's something to be thankful for," he laughed, as he set out upon
his journey through Old Mother Goose Land. "I'll stop at the first
cobbler shop and see what I can buy."

As he rode gayly along he came across a funny little old woman. On her
head was a red sunbonnet and over her shoulders a bright-green shawl.
Black-lace mits covered her thin hands, and a pair of white slippers her
two little feet.

"My good woman," said Puss, Junior, politely raising his cap as he drew
in his Good Gray Horse, "can you tell me where I may find a shoemaker?"

The old woman smiled and said:

          "What shoemaker makes shoes without leather,
           With all the four elements put together?
           Fire and water, earth and air,
           And every customer wears a pair."

"I don't know," answered Puss.

"Why, a blacksmith, you goosey!" cried the little old woman, tossing her
head.

"I don't want shoes for my Good Gray Horse," said Puss, in a disgusted
tone of voice. "I want a pair of shoes for myself."

"Ho, ho!" laughed the little old woman. "So my fine Sir Cat would have a
pair of shoes?"

"No, my good woman--a pair of _boots_!"

"Well, then," she replied, "keep on your way until you reach yonder
village. Then cross the bridge and you will soon come to a bootmaker. He
will, no doubt, be able to fit a pair of boots to Your Royal Highness's
feet." Then she turned up a lane and left Puss to continue his way
alone.

"Ah, me!" sighed Puss. "I don't feel a bit like myself without my
red-topped boots. Indeed, I feel like an imposter. How will anyone
believe that I am Puss in Boots, Junior, if I have no boots?" And, for
the first time in his life, he felt discouraged. He had met with many
disappointments on his journey through Mother Goose country, but to be
without boots seemed almost too hard to bear. Still, with a brave heart,
he rode on toward the village. "I have at least the money with which to
buy them," he said, "and this is much to be thankful for." Which was a
wise saying, I think, for a cat who had been out in the world for so
short a time as had little Puss, Junior.




THE COBBLER


"CAN you make me a pair of boots?" asked Puss, Junior, reining in his
Good Gray Horse.

The cobbler, who was sitting close to the open window of his little
shop, looked up from his bench.

"Will you need two pair?" he asked.

"One pair, my good man," replied Puss, Junior, haughtily. "Do you
imagine I wear boots on my front paws?"

"Well, my good Sir Cat," answered the cobbler, "I did not know for
certain. I can make two pair as well as one."

"And charge for two pair, I warrant, also," cried Puss, with a grin.

"I can give you fine work," said the cobbler.

"Are you sure?" asked Puss. "My last pair, which was unfortunately
burned up in a fire, was made by a royal cobbler."

"I have not made boots for royalty," replied the cobbler, "but I made
the shoe in which an old woman lives with so many children that it would
take you an hour to count them all. That was some job, let me tell you.
One doesn't often live in a shoe, although one may walk in one."

"You don't mean to tell me you made that wonderful shoe?" cried Puss.

"Most certainly, my good Sir Cat."

[Illustration]

"Then you shall make me a pair of boots. And, mind you, my good man,
they must have red tops."

"That they shall," said the cobbler. "Dismount, and come into my humble
shop. I would measure your feet."

"Perhaps you have a pair on hand that will fit me," said Puss, gazing
about the tiny shop.

"I will see," replied the cobbler.

"I am in haste," said Puss, as the cobbler looked over his stock. "I am
in haste, for I have yet a long journey before me, and cannot delay. I
am in search of my illustrious father, Puss in Boots."

"What!" cried the cobbler. "I once made a pair of boots for a cat. Could
it have been the noble Puss in Boots?"

"Tell me where he lives," cried Puss, much excited.

"Ah," replied the cobbler, "that I do not know, for it is many years ago
since I made the boots. But here is a pair I think will fit you."

"I would rather that you had told me where my father lives," said little
Puss, Junior, "than to have found a pair of boots."

"They are certainly a fine fit," said the cobbler, gazing with
admiration at Puss, Junior's, feet.

"Yes," answered Puss, "and here is the money. Good-by," and off rode our
little hero, still in search of his father, the famous Puss in Boots.




DOCTOR DRAKE

          DOCTOR DRAKE kept a shop,
          Of dimensions not large,
          In a hole in the haystack
          By the side of the yard,
          Where he dispensed certain small stones
          And one or two gravels,
          With sundry rare herbs
          He had found in his travels.


"I hope the good doctor's at home," said Puss, as he reined in his Good
Gray Horse. "I don't feel at all well to-day."

So he dismounted and knocked on the front door, and pretty soon the
famous duck doctor appeared. He wore a big pair of spectacles and a very
high collar, around which was tied a green cravat which matched the
feathers of his tail.

"Quack, quack!" said Doctor Drake. "What do you want?"

"I don't know, Doctor," answered Puss, Junior. "I feel far from well; in
fact, I think I'm going to be very ill."

"Don't worry," replied Doctor Drake; "that's what we doctors are looking
for--sick people. I can cure you, never fear."

"Thank you," said Puss, Junior.

[Illustration]

"Don't thank me yet," answered Doctor Drake; "wait till you're
cured--then pay me."

"That will I gladly do," replied Puss, Junior; "only make me feel like
myself again."

"I think," said Doctor Drake, after looking at Puss, Junior's, tongue,
"you had better give up horseback riding; it's bad for you."

"Oh, dear!" sighed poor Puss, Junior. "What shall I do with my Good Gray
Horse?"

"Sell him to me," replied Doctor Drake. "I'm in need of a horse. My
practice is growing so large I find it difficult to make my calls."

"Yes, I suppose you do," said Puss. "Your feet are not for walking, but
for swimming."

"Right you are," assented the doctor. "Of course, some of my patients
live in the pond; but, then, again, a lot of them don't. Take these
pills." And the famous duck doctor handed Puss, Junior, a little round
box. "One every hour; they'll soon fix you up, all right. Now, how much
do you want for your horse?"

Puss, Junior, scratched his head. "What will you give?" he asked,
tearfully.

"Twenty-five pounds," replied the doctor.

"Very well," said Puss. "The horse is yours. Give me my money and I will
journey along on foot, though it goes hard with me to part with my
faithful steed." Then, tucking the box of pills in his pocket, Puss
proceeded on his journey.




"NO BIGGER THAN MY THUMB"


HAVING traveled so long on horseback, Puss, Junior, found it hard to
resume his journey on foot. However, he manfully set out once more. The
pills Doctor Drake had given him made him feel quite frisky, and he ran
along at a good rate. In fact, he felt that perhaps he might just as
well have kept his Good Gray Horse and taken the chance of becoming
really ill. But it was too late now; the bargain had been made and he
must make the best of it. So on he jogged, whistling a merry tune to
help along his tired feet.

By and by he came to a pretty cottage and, entering the front gate,
looked in through the window. At a table sat a woman, singing:

  "I had a little husband, no bigger than my thumb;
   I put him in a pint pot, and there I bid him drum.
   I bought a little horse that galloped up and down;
   I saddled him and bridled him and sent him out of town.
   I gave him some garters to garter up his hose,
   And a little pocket handkerchief to wipe his pretty nose."

"I wish she had given me the little horse," said Puss, with a sigh, "for
I certainly miss my good gray steed."

Just then the woman looked up and, seeing Puss at the window, called
out, "Come in, little Sir Cat."

Puss, Junior, jumped nimbly through the open window and stood beside
her.

"What do you think of my little husband?"

"He certainly is no bigger than your thumb, madam."

"He is a good little man, all the same," she replied, "and when he's
astride of his little horse he makes a fine appearance. Wait, and I will
show you how well he can ride."

All of a sudden Puss heard the pawing of hoofs, and there stood the
prettiest little horse he had ever seen. It was no larger than a play
toy, but well built. A long, silky mane fell over his neck, and a curly
tail almost reached to the ground. Then, quick as a wink, the little
husband jumped out of the pint pot and vaulted nimbly into the saddle.

"Gid-ap," he cried, and away went the little horse down the road.

"Good-by, madam," cried Puss, running after the tiny horseman. But it
was impossible to catch up with him, and pretty soon he disappeared in a
cloud of dust. "Well, well," cried Puss to himself, "I had no idea that
such a tiny steed could run so fast. Will wonders never cease until I
have found my dear father, Puss in Boots?"

Then, taking out his pocket handkerchief, he wiped his forehead. "I
shall not despair, however," he said, bravely, "for I have a good pair
of legs, and all journeys come to an end at last, so I shall keep
merrily on my way."




TELL-TALE-TIT

          TELL-TALE-TIT!
            Your tongue shall be slit,
          And all the dogs in the town
            Shall have a little bit.


Oh, dear me! This is what was going to happen to the little girl who had
told on her brothers. And all the little dogs were standing around,
wagging their tails, as Puss, Junior, passed by.

It was a wonder that the dogs didn't rush out and bark at him, but they
were so anxious to get a piece of the little girl's tongue that they
didn't notice him at all. Perhaps a cat with boots and spurs, a hat and
plume, and a trusty sword didn't look like an ordinary cat to them. And
neither was our little traveler.

You see, these little boys had gone into an alley to play marbles, on
their way to school, and then the little girl had told her father how
they had missed their lessons.

"And Jimmy Jones won all the marbles, and there was a fight! And the
teacher kept them in after school!"

"Oh me! oh my!" cried Puss, Junior. "Please don't slit her tongue!"

"But why did you tell tales on your brothers?" asked her father.

"Oh, please don't slit her tongue!" cried Puss, Junior, again.

"That's what they did in _Mother Goose_."

"It must have been very long ago in the dark ages," answered Puss,
laying hold of his sword.

"Well, it's only a rhyme!" laughed her father, picking up his little
girl and hugging her. "Come on, Sir Cat, follow me. You are quite a
Knight of the Round Table. If a fair lady be in distress you are her
champion!"

Pretty soon all three came to a little house and Puss was invited to
come in and play. There was a nice swing under an old apple tree, and
soon he was swinging as high as the little girl could push him. All of a
sudden he jumped out up among the branches and hung on to a limb, just
like a trapeze performer.

"I once was with a circus," he explained, sliding down the rope and
turning a somersault on the ground.

Just then the little boys came in the gate and how they did laugh! And
Jimmy gave Puss all the marbles which he had won, and his father, who
had been sitting on the porch watching the fun, gave Puss a dollar.
After that they all went in for lunch and Puss didn't start out on his
journey until late in the afternoon.




ON THE WAY

          "ON the way, on the way,
           To see my father, old and gray.
           Faster still, my good gray steed,
           Over hill and flowering mead.

          "Faster, faster, Good Gray Horse,
           Hasten swiftly on your course,
           Till I see the stately towers
           Where my father spends his hours."


"Urge me not too much!" panted the faithful steed. "I'm doing my best,
but these hills have made me short of breath."

Dear me! I forgot to tell you that the Good Gray Horse had run away from
the famous Doctor Drake and had caught up to Puss, Junior, just as I
commenced this story.

"Forgive me," cried little Puss, Junior. "In my anxiety to see my father
I have been selfish." And he slipped a lump of sugar into the mouth of
the Good Gray Horse.

Well, after several miles had gone by, Puss drew rein at a drinking
trough beside the road, where his faithful steed drank long and deep.
And as they rested a while, who should fly by but a busy bumblebee,
buzzing from flower to flower.

He was a jolly-looking bee, and presently he said to Puss, "Whither are
you bound, my good Sir Cat?"

[Illustration]

"To the castle of my Lord of Carabas," replied our little traveler. "I'm
seeking my father, who is seneschal to my lord."

"Ah, is that so?" exclaimed the bee. "These are stirring times. I heard
only last week that my Lord of Carabas was going to war!"

"What!" exclaimed our small hero, jumping to his feet and clapping his
paw to his sword. "I must hurry on!"

"Bravely spoken," answered the bee. "I have seen many soldiers at the
castle of late. Indeed, the country is all excitement--flags flying,
drums beating, men drilling, women scraping lint. All is bustle and
hustle."

"And what brings you so far from there?" inquired Puss, replacing his
sword in his scabbard.

"My two good wings," replied the bumblebee, and he laughed as he dove
head first into a flower after its dewy sweetness.

"Come, little master," cried the Good Gray Horse. "I am rested. Let us
hasten on our journey."

Puss bade good-by to the golden bumblebee and sprang once more into the
saddle. And the Good Gray Horse threw out his heels and galloped off
toward the castle of my Lord of Carabas, but evening came upon them and
they were still far from their destination, so Puss dismounted for the
night beneath a grove of trees.




LITTLE BOY BLUE


YOU remember in the last story that Puss and his Good Gray Horse had
camped in a grove of trees for the night. Well, just as Puss was about
to curl up and take a little trip to dreamland he heard a voice singing:

          "Little Boy Blue,
             Come, leave your toys.
           It's time to wash hands
             For little boys.

          "Supper is ready,
             You must not wait.
           Tuck in your napkin
             And don't tip your plate.

          "Oh, where is Boy Blue?
             Let's all take a peep.
           He's there on the sofa,
             Fast asleep."

Puss opened his eyes and saw a little light twinkling through the trees.
So he got up and went toward it to find that it shone from the window of
a small cottage. As he knocked on the door he thought, "I may be asked
to spend the night, and that will be much more comfortable than lying
beneath the trees." And it turned out just as he thought. The pretty
woman who opened the door asked him in, saying, softly:

"Tiptoe in, my dear Puss, Junior, for Boy Blue has just gone to sleep."
And you know how softly a cat can tiptoe! But of course he first slipped
off his red-topped boots with their clanking spurs.

Then Boy Blue's mother gave Puss, Junior, some milk and cake, and after
that he put his Good Gray Horse in the stable and came back to sit down
by the fire.

Over the mantelpiece hung a silver horn, and as Puss looked up at it he
remembered long ago in Old Mother Goose Land a little Boy Blue who blew
his horn to call the cows from the fields of corn.

"Does your little Boy Blue go to sleep in a haystack?"

"No, my dear," laughingly replied his mother, "but his father did. And
that's the horn he used to blow in the early morn to call the cows and
the woolly sheep when under the haystack he'd fallen asleep."

"I met him once, a long time ago," said little Puss, Junior. "I remember
the place quite well. He carried me on his shoulder over to see little
Miss Muffet who sat on a tuffet, and she gave us some curds and whey
till a horrid old spider sat down beside us and frightened her away."

"And so you were the little cat who was with him, were you?" said little
Boy Blue's mother.

But Puss didn't answer, for he had fallen fast asleep and was dreaming
that he was once more with his dear father, the famous Puss in Boots.




ALPHABET TOWN


NOW let me see. Where did I leave off in the last story? Oh yes, I
remember now. Little Puss, Junior, had fallen asleep in the house where
little Boy Blue lived. Yes, Puss had fallen asleep in front of the
fireplace over which hung the silver horn that called the cows from the
fields of corn. Well, the next morning the horn began blowing all by
itself, and this, of course, woke up everybody in the house; so Puss
washed his face and hands and curled his whiskers and after that he
pulled on his red-topped boots and was ready for breakfast. Then Mrs.
Boy Blue came downstairs with little Boy Blue. He was only three years
old, but he could blow a horn, though I don't think the cows paid much
attention to him, for they knew he was only doing it in fun, you see.

Well, after breakfast, Puss, Junior, bade them all good-by and mounted
his Good Gray Horse, and by and by, after he had ridden many a mile, he
came to a very queer place--it was called Alphabet Town. But the
strangest thing of all was that the alphabet was alive. Yes, from A to Z
it was alive, and Puss was so interested that he drew rein at the gates
of Alphabet Town because, he said to himself, "If I expect to get
through Mother Goose Land I must learn the alphabet, and the sooner I
learn it the sooner I shall see my dear father." So he went up to the
schoolhouse and this is what he learned:

          A was an Ant who worked all the day.
          B was a Butterfly, flitting away.
          C was a Cherry that hung on a tree.
          D was a Daisy that grew on the lea.
          E was an Elm that stood by the school.
          F was a Frog that lived in a pool
          G was a Goat with a beard on his face.
          H was a Horse that won a fine race.
          I was an Insect that fed on a peach.
          J was a Jay Bird whose song was a screech.
          K was a Kitten that played with a string.
          L was a Lambkin that browsed in the spring.
          M was a Magpie that stole a gold spoon.
          N was the Nest where she slept 'neath the moon.
          O was the Oak Tree that held safe the nest.
          P was a Pigeon with soft purple vest.
          Q was a Quail that was shot with a gun.
          R was a Rooster that woke up the sun.
          S was a Snail that was awfully slow.
          T was a Turtle, no faster, you know.
          U was a Unicorn; of him you have heard.
          V was a Vulture, a rapacious bird.
          W was a Wren that made a sweet noise.
          X was a Xmas Tree, covered with toys.
          Y was a Yule Log, dragged through the snow.
          Z was a Zero when winter winds blow.

And I think when I tell you that Puss learned this alphabet in less than
half an hour you will agree with me he was a very bright cat.




LUCY LOCKET


"GID-AP!" said Puss, Junior. "Gid-ap, my good steed, for we must hasten
on. 'Tis yet a long ways we must journey ere I find my illustrious
father, Puss in Boots."

The Good Gray Horse quickened his pace, and soon many a mile was left
behind.

At length Puss saw a little girl in the doorway of a cottage.

          Lucy Locket
          Lost her pocket;
          Kitty Fisher
            Found it;
          Nothing in it,
          Nothing in it,
          But the binding
            Round it.

"Whoa!" cried Puss. "Can I help you, miss?"

"I'm so disappointed!" cried the little girl. "I thought there might be
a bright penny inside."

"Are you sure there isn't?" asked Puss, sympathetically. "Do you want a
penny very much?"

"Yes," replied the child.

"Well, here's one," replied Puss, thrusting his paw into his pocket and
bringing out a bright penny. Leaning down from his horse, he handed it
to the little maid.

"What are you going to buy with it?" he asked.

"Peppermint stick," she answered. "Peppermint stick with red rings all
around it."

[Illustration]

"That sounds pretty nice," said Puss. "Where's the candy shop?"

"Just over there," she replied, pointing to a small shop on the opposite
side of the street.

"Let's go in," suggested Puss, dismounting and tying his Good Gray
Horse to the hitching post.

The candy shop smelled very nice. Molasses candy in long yellow coils
lay in the glass cases. Sticks of pink-and-white peppermint candy stood
in big glass bowls with shiny glass stoppers. Chocolate drops were
ranged in long glass dishes. There were gumdrops and marshmallows, and
goodness knows what all. Puss thrust his paw deep into his pocket, for
he knew that one little penny wouldn't go very far in this candy shop.

"What other kind do you like?" he asked.

"Why don't you call me Kitty?" laughed the little maid. "My name is
Kitty Fisher."

Just then another little girl appeared.

"Hello, Lucy Locket!" cried Kitty.

"I've just lost my pocket," said Lucy. "Did you happen to find it?"

"Yes," replied Kitty, "but there was nothing in it. Just a ribbon round
it."

"That's 'cause I took out my penny," answered Lucy, "and I'm going to
spend it right here before I lose it."

Soon both little girls had eaten their peppermint-candy sticks. And
after Puss had given his Good Gray Horse a big lump of sugar he mounted
and rode away.




TOM, THE PIPER'S SON

          "TOM was a piper's son,
           He learned to play when he was young;
           But all the tune that he could play
           Was 'Over the hills and far away.'"


"Well, it's a pretty fine tune," said Puss, Junior, to himself, as the
strains from Tom's pipe came clear and sweet across the meadow. "I wish
I could play as well." Again the music came down the breeze, clear and
sweet, and pretty soon Tom came capering toward him, followed by a crowd
of boys and girls.

"Heigh-ho!" laughed Puss. "Here they come, dancing away, as if they had
nothing to do but play all the day long."

"Over the hills and far away!" piped Tom.

"Good morning!" cried Puss.

"Come and dance," said the piper's son, taking the pipe from his mouth;
"come and have a merry dance. Make those red-topped booties prance."

"Then play a merry jig," answered Puss, catching up a small pig and
waltzing him around at a giddy rate.

"Hold on!" cried the pig. "I'm getting dizzy."

"I won't let you fall," replied Puss, with a grin.

"Let go!" squeaked the pig. "I tell you I'm getting dizzy!"

"Well, why didn't you say 'let go' at first," laughed Puss. "You said,
'hold on.'"

By this time the poor pig was so out of breath that he rolled over on
his side and lay quite still until a small boy said:

"Your tail is all twisted from dancing around and around."

"Nonsense!" replied the pig, sitting up. "Pigs' tails are always
twisted. Dancing makes your head go around, but it doesn't curl your
tail."

Then all of a sudden Tom commenced to play again.

"Oh, please don't!" cried the breathless pig. "I don't want to dance any
more."

      Tom with his pipe did play with such skill
      That those who heard him could never stand still;
      Whenever they heard him they began to dance--
      Even pigs on their hind legs would after him prance.

And, goodness me! it was such wonderful music that even Puss couldn't
keep still, but must needs dance with a little girl in a blue dress
until Tom was out of breath and too tired to play any longer.




OLD DAME TROT


AS soon as Tom, the piper's son, stopped playing everybody sat down to
rest, even the little pig who had been waltzing about on his hind legs.
He didn't try to run away. I guess he was too tired for that. Pretty
soon he took out a yellow handkerchief and wiped the perspiration from
his pink nose, and after that the little girl in blue asked Puss,
Junior, where he had learned to dance.

"At Mademoiselle Feline's dancing school," replied Puss. "She taught
twenty-one little kittens twice a week."

Just then, all of a sudden, Tom, the piper's son, jumped to his feet and
started off, and before very long

          He met Old Dame Trot with a basket of eggs;
          He used his pipe and she used her legs;
          She danced about till the eggs were all broke;
          She began to fret, but he laughed at the joke.

"I think it very mean of you to break an old lady's eggs," cried Puss.

"I'm sorry your eggs are broken," cried Tom to Old Dame Trot. "If you'll
come with me I'll show you where there's a nest full of eggs; it's in
the dry grass under the raspberry bushes in yonder meadow."

But the old lady had gone only a few steps when

          Tom saw a cross fellow beating an ass
          Heavy laden with pots, pans, dishes, and glass;
          He took out his pipe and played them a tune,
          And the jackass's load was lightened full soon.

"It serves that fellow right," cried Puss. "His donkey had too heavy a
load."

And while the tin pans were flying about and clattering on the stones
the old lady climbed over the fence.

"There goes the hen to her nest now!" shouted the children.

"I'll play her a tune and while she's dancing you pick up the eggs and
give them to Old Dame Trot," cried Tom.

Of course as soon as the music commenced the little hen began to dance.
And when all the eggs were in the old lady's basket he stopped playing,
but the little hen was so provoked that she went straight home to the
barnyard.




BOBBY SHAFTO


AS Puss, Junior, rode along on his Good Gray Horse he passed a pretty
cottage near the roadway. And the roses that climbed over the front
porch were so fragrant and the voice of the girl floating through the
open window was so sweet that he stopped to listen.

          "Bobby Shafto roams the skies
           With silver goggles on his eyes.
           A lonely girl am I who sighs
             For pretty Bobby Shafto.

          "Bobby Shafto's bright and fair,
           Very gay and debonair;
           He's the king of all the air,
             Bonny Bobby Shafto.

          "His airship is the fastest one
           That races with the golden sun,
           And when his azure voyage is done,
             Pretty Bobby Shafto.

          "He's promised he will marry me,
           And then how happy I shall be;
           We two shall sail the starry sea,
             I and Bobby Shafto!"

[Illustration]

Pretty soon the owner of the lovely voice looked out of the window and
when she saw Puss she asked him to come in and sit on the front porch
while she went for some cream. So Puss tied his Good Gray Horse to the
hitching post and, opening the little gate, sat down on the doorsteps.
After he had finished drinking the cream she asked him to tell her
where he was going with his lovely red-topped boots and long feather
plume. And would he take out his sword and show it to her? All this made
him very proud, and of course he thought she was a lovely little girl.

Well, after a while they spied an airship in the sky. Pretty soon it
came nearer and nearer till finally it landed in a field close by. The
little girl and Puss jumped up and ran as fast as they could across the
road and through the fence.

Throwing her arms around Bobby Shafto, she cried, "He's the king of all
the air."

Then he took off his silver goggles and shook hands with Puss, and soon
they all came back to the little cottage and had ice cream and sponge
cake, and Bobby Shafto fed the Good Gray Horse a quart of oats, and
after that Puss said good-by and rode away.




LITTLE ROBIN REDBREAST


"WELL, well!" said Puss to himself as he left Bobby Shafto and the
little girl. "To think I should see an airship in Mother Goose country!"

By and by he heard a little bird singing:

          "Little Robin Redbreast sat upon a tree,
           Up went pussy cat, and down went he;
           Down came pussy cat, away robin ran;
           Said Little Robin Redbreast, 'Catch me if you can!'
           Little Robin Redbreast jumped upon a wall,
           Pussy cat jumped after him, and almost got a fall;
           Little Robin chirped and sang, and what did pussy say?
           Pussy cat said, 'Mew,' and Robin flew away."

"What are you trying to do?" asked Puss, Junior, stopping under the tree
and looking up at the pussy cat.

"I'm not trying to do anything," replied the pussy cat, crossly. "I was
wishing I had wings."

"They'd be very convenient at times," said Puss, with a grin.

"Indeed they would," answered the pussy cat. "I'd rather have them than
red-topped boots."

"Perhaps," answered Puss. "But I have found my boots most helpful. Do
you know," he continued, "if people would be a little more contented
with what they have I think they'd get more."

[Illustration]

The pussy cat looked ashamed of herself. "What you say is very true. I
suppose I ought to be thankful that I have such strong claws. It's not
hard work climbing trees, and as for running, my legs carry me very
well. Perhaps I don't need wings, after all."

"Well, I never saw a flying cat," admitted Puss, Junior, "although I've
seen some remarkable things since I started out to find my father, Puss
in Boots."

"So you are a traveler," said the pussy cat, jumping down from the wall
and walking up to Puss. "How long have you been looking for your
father?"

"A long, long time," replied Puss, Junior. "Do you know, sometimes I
almost get discouraged, for this is a big world and at times I feel so
very, very small."

"Well, you come home with me," said the pussy cat. "You need a good
rest. I think you're tired out."




THE ELF CHILD

          LITTLE Miss Pussy Cat had a house
            That was very trim and neat.
          But, oh, dear me! there wasn't a mouse
            For little Miss Pussy to eat.


"There's a nice, soft cushion on the window seat," she said to Puss,
Junior. "Why don't you take a nap?"

And as he was very tired with his long journey, he curled up and was
soon fast asleep. But, oh, dear me! all of a sudden there came a loud
knocking on the door, and when Miss Pussy opened it there stood a little
dog with a very loud bark. And then, of course, Puss woke up with a
start.

"Please make him go away," said Miss Pussy Cat. "I'm dreadfully afraid
of dogs."

So Puss picked up his big stick and the little dog ran away as fast as
he could, never again to bother little Miss Pussy Cat. And shall I tell
you why? It was because when he finally stopped running he found himself
in the woods where the fairies lived.

And when they saw him they said to one another, "This little dog has
been up to mischief, for if not, why should he run so fast?" And then
the king of the fairies said, "I will see that he makes no further
mischief," and he waved his silver wand, and the little dog turned into
a dogwood flower that blooms every year in the same spot under the great
shady trees.

Of course little Miss Pussy wondered for a long time why she never saw
him, until, one day, Jennie Wren, who lived in the woods, told her what
the fairies had done.

Well, pretty soon Puss, Junior, set out once more to find his father,
and as he went along he whistled a tune to keep up his spirits, when,
all of a sudden, he heard a little low whistle. And there in the road, a
few feet ahead, was a tiny little man dressed in green with a
high-peaked hat on his head.

          "I've never heard a whistling cat,
             So come to the wood with me,
           And whistle a tune to my elfin child
             Under the greenwood tree."

Then little Puss, Junior, followed the queer little dwarf and by and by,
after a while, they came to a glen in the wood where, under a great oak
tree, sat the prettiest little elf you ever saw. He was playing with a
gray squirrel and a striped chipmunk, but when he saw Puss he gave a
glad shout and away went the squirrel and the chipmunk. But he didn't
care, for a cat with boots was something he had never seen.

"Teach him to whistle, Sir Cat," said the dwarf.

So Puss sat down by the elf child and by and by, just as the stars began
to twinkle from the sky, he had taught him to whistle. And, would you
believe it? it sounded like a bird, it was so sweet and clear. And after
that Puss went on his way to find his father, happy to think that he had
proved so good a music master.

And some day, in another book, I will tell you how little Puss, Junior,
finds his dear father.

          THE END




THE PUSS-IN-BOOTS, Jr. SERIES

By DAVID CORY

          Author of "The Little Jack Rabbit Stories" and "Little
          Journeys to Happyland"

       *       *       *       *       *

          Handsomely Bound. Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
          Each Volume Complete in Itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

To know Puss Junior once is to love him forever. That's the way all the
little people feel about this young, adventurous cat, son of a very
famous father.

          THE ADVENTURES OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.
          FURTHER ADVENTURES OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR. IN FAIRYLAND
          TRAVELS OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND OLD MOTHER GOOSE
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., IN NEW MOTHER GOOSE LAND
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND TOM THUMB
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND ROBINSON CRUSOE
          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND THE MAN IN THE MOON

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




Little Jack Rabbit Books

(Trademark Registered)

By DAVID CORY

          Author of "Little Journeys to Happyland"

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Colored Wrappers With Text Illustrations.=

       *       *       *       *       *

A new and unique series about the furred and feathered little people of
the wood and meadow.

Children will eagerly follow the doings of little Jack Rabbit, and the
clever way in which he escapes from his three enemies, Danny Fox, Mr.
Wicked Wolf and Hungry Hawk will delight the youngsters.

          LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE JOHN HARE
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND PROFESSOR CROW
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND OLD MAN WEASEL
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MR. WICKED WOLF
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND HUNGRY HAWK
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE POLICEMAN DOG
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MISS MOUSIE
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE LUCKY
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE YELLOW DOG TRAMP

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND

By DAVID CORY

       *       *       *       *       *

=Profusely Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers.=

       *       *       *       *       *

          Printed in large type--easy to read.
          For children from 6 to 8 years.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new series of exciting adventures by the author of the LITTLE JACK
RABBIT books. This series is unique in that it deals with unusual and
exciting adventures on land and sea and in the air.


THE CRUISE OF THE NOAH'S ARK

          This is a good rainy day story. On just such a day
          Mr. Noah invites Marjorie to go for a trip in
          Noah's Ark. She gets aboard just in time and away
          it floats out into the big wide world.


THE MAGIC SOAP BUBBLE

          The king of the gnomes has a magic pipe with which
          he blows a wonderful bubble and taking Ed. with
          him they both have a delightful time in Gnomeland.


THE ICEBERG EXPRESS

          The Mermaid's magic comb changes little Mary
          Louise into a mermaid. The Polar Bear Porter on
          the Iceberg Express invites her to take a trip
          with him and away they go.


THE WIND WAGON

          Little Hero stepped aboard the Wind Wagon and
          started on a journey to many wonderful places and
          had a delightful time.


THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

          A little old man gave Jimmy the Magic Umbrella
          which took him to Happyland, where he had many
          adventures.

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE FLYAWAYS STORIES

By ALICE DALE HARDY

          Author of The Riddle Club Books

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Individual Colored Jackets and Colored Illustrations by
          WALTER S. ROGERS=

       *       *       *       *       *

A splendid new line of interesting tales for the little ones,
introducing many of the well known characters of fairyland in a series
of novel adventures. The Flyaways are a happy family and every little
girl and boy will want to know all about them.


THE FLYAWAYS AND CINDERELLA

          How the Flyaways went to visit Cinderella only to
          find that Cinderella's Prince had been carried off
          by the Three Robbers, Rumbo, Hibo and Jobo. "I'll
          rescue him!" cried Pa Flyaway and then set out for
          the stronghold of the robbers. A splendid
          continuation of the original story of Cinderella.


THE FLYAWAYS AND LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD

          On their way to visit Little Red Riding Hood the
          Flyaways fell in with Tommy Tucker and The Old
          Woman Who Lived in a Shoe. They told Tommy about
          the Magic Button on Red Riding Hood's cloak. How
          the wicked Wolf stole the Magic Button and how the
          wolves plotted to eat up Little Red Riding Hood
          and all her family, and how the Flyaways and King
          Cole sent the wolves flying, makes a story no
          children will want to miss.


THE FLYAWAYS AND GOLDILOCKS

          The Flyaways wanted to see not only Goldilocks but
          also the Three Bears and they took a remarkable
          journey through the air to do so. Tommy even rode
          on a Rocket and met the monstrous Blue Frog. When
          they arrived at Goldilocks' house they found that
          the Three Bears had been there before them and
          mussed everything up, much to Goldilocks' despair.
          "We must drive those bears out of the country!"
          said Pa Flyaway. Then they journeyed underground
          to the Yellow Palace, and oh! so many things
          happened after that!

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE BOBBSEY TWINS BOOKS

For Little Men and Women

By LAURA LEE HOPE

          Author of "The Bunny Brown Series," Etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Durably Bound. Illustrated. Uniform Style of Binding.
          Every Volume Complete in Itself.=

       *       *       *       *       *

These books for boys and girls between the ages of three and ten stand
among children and their parents of this generation where the books of
Louisa May Alcott stood in former days. The haps and mishaps of this
inimitable pair of twins, their many adventures and experiences are a
source of keen delight to imaginative children everywhere.

          THE BOBBSEY TWINS
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE COUNTRY
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT THE SEASHORE
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT SCHOOL
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT SNOW LODGE
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON A HOUSEBOAT
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT MEADOW BROOK
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT HOME
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN A GREAT CITY
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON BLUEBERRY ISLAND
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS ON THE DEEP BLUE SEA
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE GREAT WEST
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT CEDAR CAMP
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT THE COUNTY FAIR
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS CAMPING OUT
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AND BABY MAY
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS KEEPING HOUSE
          THE BOBBSEY TWINS AT CLOVERBANK

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS SERIES

By LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY


       *       *       *       *       *

          =Handsomely Bound. Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
          For Children 6 to 12 Years=

       *       *       *       *       *

This series presents early American history in a manner that impresses
the young readers. Because of George and Martha Washington Parke, two
young descendants of the famous General Washington, these stories follow
exactly the life of the great American, by means of playing they act the
life of the Washingtons, both in battles and in society.

THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS

          Their thrilling battles and expeditions generally
          end in "punishment" lessons read by Mrs. Parke
          from the "Life of Washington." The culprits listen
          intently, for this reading generally gives them
          new ideas for further games of Indian warfare and
          Colonists' battles.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS RELATIVES

          The Davis children visit the Parke home and join
          zealously in the games of playing General
          Washington. So zealously, in fact, that little Jim
          almost loses his scalp.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS' TRAVELS

          The children wage a fierce battle upon the roof of
          a hotel in New York City. Then, visiting the Davis
          home in Philadelphia, the patriotic Washingtons
          vanquish the Hessians on a battle-field in the
          empty lot back of the Davis property.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS AT SCHOOL

          After the school-house battle the Washingtons
          discover a band of gypsies camping near the back
          road to their homes and incidentally they secure
          the stolen horse which the gypsies had taken from
          the "butter and egg farmer" of the Parkes.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS' HOLIDAYS

          They spend a pleasant summer on two adjoining
          farms in Vermont. During the voyage they try to
          capture a "frigate" but little Jim is caught and
          about to be punished by the Captain when his
          confederates hasten in and save him.

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




THE HONEY BUNCH BOOKS

By HELEN LOUISE THORNDYKE

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations Drawn by
          WALTER S. ROGERS=

       *       *       *       *       *

Honey Bunch is a dainty, thoughtful little girl, and to know her is to
take her to your heart at once.

Little girls everywhere will want to discover what interesting
experiences she is having wherever she goes.

          HONEY BUNCH: JUST A LITTLE GIRL
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE CITY
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS ON THE FARM
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST VISIT TO THE SEASHORE
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST LITTLE GARDEN
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST DAYS IN CAMP
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST AUTO TOUR
          HONEY BUNCH: HER FIRST TRIP ON THE OCEAN

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET &amp; DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK

[Illustration]

          _"Faster, faster, Good Gray Horse,
              Hasten swiftly on your course,
            'Till I see the stately towers
               Where my father spends his hours."_

[Illustration]

          _Little Puss Boots, hat in paw
             Bowed as Miss Pussy opened the door.
           "Glad to see you," she purred. "Come in!
             My little house is as neat as a pin!"_

[Illustration]

          _"Robinson Crusoe, how do you do!"
              As a strangely dressed man came into view,
            Cried little Puss Junior, raising his paw,
              As he stood 'neath a palm tree by the shore._

[Illustration]

          _"Grandmother Goose your trusty broom
              Makes spick and span each cottage room,"
            Said little Puss Boots, doffing his hat,
              For he was a most polite little cat._




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.

Page 54, "sing" changed to "song" (SING a song of sixpence)

Page 71, "humpety" changed to "bumpety" to match rest of usage (Bumpety,
bumpety, bump!)

Page 134, "stands" changed to "stand" (and ten stand)



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUSS IN BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD
GRAY HORSE***


******* This file should be named 32964.txt or 32964.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/9/6/32964



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
