The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of a Red Deer, by J. W. Fortescue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of a Red Deer

Author: J. W. Fortescue

Release Date: August 9, 2010 [EBook #33384]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF A RED DEER ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






[Illustration: THE STORY OF A RED-DEER]




THE STORY OF A RED DEER


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE STORY OF A RED DEER

BY THE HON. J. W. FORTESCUE


London
MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
1897

RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED
LONDON AND BUNGAY.



TABLE OF CONTENTS

EPISTLE DEDICATORY     v
CHAPTER I              1
CHAPTER II            11
CHAPTER III           24
CHAPTER IV            35
CHAPTER V             47
CHAPTER VI            63
CHAPTER VII           75
CHAPTER VIII          87
CHAPTER IX           103
CHAPTER X            117
CHAPTER XI           128



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.

_To_

_MR. HUGH FORTESCUE_,


_Honoured Sir_,

_When in the spring of this present year you asked of me that I should
write you a book, I was at the first not a little troubled; for of
making of many books there is no end, and of making of good books but
small beginning; and albeit there be many heroes of our noble county
of Devon, whose lives, if worthily written, might exceed in value all
other books (saving always those that are beyond price) that might be
placed in the hands of the youth thereof for instruction and example,
yet for such a task I deemed myself all too poorly fitted; for if men
would write books to be read of the young, they must write them, not
after particular study, but from the fulness and the overflowing of
their knowledge of such things as they have dwelt withal and felt and
loved beyond all others._

_So at the last I bethought me that there was no book that I could
more profitably write for you than the life of one of our own red
deer, which, as they be of the most beautiful of all creatures to the
eye, so be also the most worthy of study by the mind for their
subtlety, their nobility and their wisdom. For though I would have you
love the stories of great men and take delight in the reading of good
books, yet I would have you take no less delight in the birds and the
beasts that share with you your home, and in the observance of their
goings out and their comings in, of their friends and of their
enemies, of their prosperities and of their perils; whereby you will
gain not only that which the great Mr. Milton (in his tract of
Education) hath called the helpful experiences of hunters, fowlers and
fishermen, but such a love of God's creatures as will make the world
the fuller of joys for you because the fuller of friends; and this not
in one wise only, for I have ever noticed that they which be fondest
of dumb creatures are given to be tenderest to their fellow-men._

_So here you have the life of a wild red deer, set down with such
poor skill as I possess, even as the deer have told it to me in many a
long ride and many a stirring chase, and as they have told it to all
others that would listen, to such great hunters of old as the noble
Count Gaston de Foix and the worthy Sieur Jacques du Fouilloux, and to
many friends, of whom some indeed are passed away, but many yet
remain, striving ever to hear more of the same story. And if my tale
be short, yet blame me not, for it is for yourself by your own
learning of the deer to enlarge and to enrich it; so that when your
nine years are waxed to threescore and nine, you may take down this
small volume and write it anew, out of the treasures of a fuller
knowledge than mine own, for the generations that shall come after you
in this our ancient and well-beloved home._

_And so not doubting of your kindly acceptance hereof, I bid you
heartily farewell, being always_

_Your very loving kinsman and faithful friend to serve you,_

                                                  _J. W. F._

_Castle Hill.
  This 26th of September, 1897._




THE STORY OF A RED-DEER

CHAPTER I


Once upon a time there was a little Red-Deer Calf. You know what a
Red-Deer is, for you of all boys have been brought up to know, though
it may be that you have never seen a calf very close to you. A very
pretty little fellow he was, downy-haired and white-spotted, though as
yet his legs were rather long and his ears were rather large, for he
was still only a very few weeks old. But he did not think himself a
baby by any means, for he was an early calf and had been born in the
second week in May; and a birthday in the second week in May is the
greatest event that can occur in a Red-Deer's family.

The first thing that he remembered was that he found himself lying
very snug and warm in a patch of fern, with the most beautiful pair of
brown eyes that ever were seen gazing straight down upon him. And
soon he was aware that they were the eyes of the Hind his mother, that
they followed him whereever he went, and watched over him whatever he
did, and that, whatever he might want, she was there to provide it for
him. She always had a cosy bed ready for him in grass or fern; she
washed him clean and brushed his little coat with her tongue every
morning; and she taught him but two lessons--to lie as still as a
mouse, and to do just as he was bid. For every morning before dawn she
had to go afield to feed herself, farther than the little Calf could
travel with her; and as she had no nurse to leave in charge of him,
she just tucked him up as closely as she could, and told him to lie
still till she came back. And like a good little fellow he obeyed her;
which was well for him, for if he had taken it into his head to jump
up and look about him, some evil man or beast might have seen him and
made away with him; and then this story would never have been written.

Always just before the sun rose she came back, and every day she
seemed to love him better, and every day he felt that she was more
than the whole world to him. And morning after morning up rose the
blessed sun, and drove the mist away, and sent a little ray forward
through the fern to kiss him and bid him good-morrow. And the mist
left a drop on every blade and blossom, and said, "Good-bye, my little
fellow; I shall come back again this evening;" and the drops nodded
and sparkled and twinkled, and kept whispering, "Yes, coming back this
evening," over and over again, till the sun said that he could stand
it no longer and was obliged to dry them all up. Then rose a hum of
many wings as the flies woke up, and went out for their day's work;
but the breeze moved like a sentry over the bed of the little Calf and
said to them, "Move on, move on; this little Calf must not be
disturbed;" and they dared not disobey, for they knew that, if they
did, he was certain sooner or later to send for his big brother, the
Westerly Gale, who would blow them away with a vengeance. And all
through the day the breeze kept singing through the graceful, yielding
grass and the stubborn wiry heather; while mingled with it came
snatches of a little song from the brown peat-stream in the combe
below him. He could not make out much of it except these words, which
came over and over again:

    _Mother and child come here, come here,_
    _I am the friend of the Wild Red-Deer_

For some time they moved but little distant from the place where he
was born, for his legs could not yet carry him very far; but as he
grew stronger they wandered farther, till at last one day he found
himself on high ground, and saw the world that he was to live in, his
heritage of Exmoor. You know it, for you have seen it, fold upon fold
of grass and heather, slashed by deep combes and merry babbling
streams, and bounded on the one hand by the blue sky and on the other
by the blue sea. It was all his own, for he was a wild Red-Deer. And
he looked upon it with his great round eyes, and pricked his ears and
tossed his little head; for the sun was shining warm above him, and
the soft west wind blew fresh and untainted over the sea and flew
across the moor, catching up all that was sweetest on its way from
grass and gorse and heather, and bearing it straight to his nostrils.
And he threw his little nose into the air and snuffed up the full,
rich breeze; for no creature has a finer scent than a deer; and he
felt that this was life indeed.

Then they went down, leaving the song of the wind ever fainter behind
them; and in its stead rose the song of the peat-stream bidding them
come down to it. So they went; and there it was trickling down as
clear as crystal, though as yellow as amber. There was but little
water in it that fine midsummer, but it hastened on none the less over
the stones in a desperate hurry, as are all Exmoor streams, to get to
the sea. And it whispered its song as it went, but so low that they
heard no words. They passed by a little shallow, and there the Calf
saw dozens of little fry, scurrying about from stone to stone; and
just below the shallow they came to a little brown, oily pool in a
basin of rock. The Calf looked into it, and there he saw his own
little form, and behind it his mother's sweet eyes watching over him.
And then for the first time he noticed that his own coat was spotted
while his mother's was red. But while he was staring at the water a
fly suddenly came, and began to dance a reel over it to show what a
fine fellow he was, when all of a sudden a neat little body, all brown
and gold and red spots, leaped up out of the water, seized the fly in
his mouth and fell back with a splash which broke the pretty picture
all to pieces.

He shrank back, for he was rather startled, but his mother soon
comforted him. "It was only a little Trout, my dear," she said, "only
a greedy little Trout."

"But he was such a pretty little fellow," he said, for he had quite
got over his fright; "I wish he would jump again."

But the Hind looked grave. "We are never unkind to the Trout," she
said, "for they belong to the peat-stream, but you must never become
familiar with them. Fallow-Deer, I believe, treat them as equals," and
here she looked very proud, "but we do not. They are a lazy lot of
fellows whose forefathers would not take the trouble to go down to the
sea, whereby they might have grown into noble fish, with a coat as
bright as the moon on the water. But they would not, and so they have
remained small and ugly, and they never lose their spots. You must
never be rude to them, for that would be unworthy of a Red-Deer, but
you must never make great friends with them. You may talk to little
Salmon when we see them, for they lose their spots, but not to the
Trout." For the Hind was a great lady, with much pride of race, which
though it made her civil to every one, taught her to be shy of idlers
and low company.

"But, mother," said the poor little Calf, "_I've_ got a spotted coat."

"But you will lose it, my darling," she said tenderly. "No, no, my
child will be a true Red-Deer."

So they left the water, and presently stopped while his mother plucked
at a tuft of sweet grass among the heather; when to his astonishment a
little grey ball of fur came bounding out of a hole in the ground, and
another at his heels, and three more after them. And they ran round
and round and played like mad things. And presently another, far
bigger than they, came up slowly out of another hole, sat up on her
hind-legs, pricked her ears, and began to look about her. Then
catching sight of the Calf she crouched down, and began in a very
shrill voice: "Why, my dear tender heart" (for she was not only a
Rabbit, but a Devonshire Rabbit, and of course spoke broad Devon), "if
it isn't my little maister, and her ladyship too, begging your pardon,
my lady. And sweetly pretty he is, my lady; and butiful you'm looking
too, in your summer coat, so glossy as a chestnut, sure enough. And
dear heart alive, how he groweth. Why, 'twas but a few days agone that
my Bucky saith to me--I don't rightly remember how many days agone,
but I mind 'twas the very day when the old Greyhen up to Badgworthy
came to ask me if I had seen her poult--for she's lost a poult, my
lady, hath the poor soul, as your ladyship knoweth. Well, my Bucky
saith to me, 'Bunny,' saith he, 'you may depend that young maister
will grow to be so fine a stag as ever was seen on Exmoor.'" Then
without pausing an instant she called out at the top of her voice to
one of the little rabbits: "Flossy-a! Come back, little bittlehead,
come back, or the fox will catch 'ee!"

The Hind listened very graciously to this long speech, for she loved
to hear good words of her Calf, and she was just a _little_ pleased to
hear of her own good looks. But she could not help looking beautiful,
and she looked all the more so because she very seldom thought about
it. So she returned the compliment by asking after Bunny and her
family.

"Oh! thank you, my lady," answered Bunny, "I reckon we'm well. There
han't been no man this way this long time, thanks be; and there's
plenty of meat, and not too much rain. And the family's well, my lady;
look to mun playing all around, so gay; and my third family this
spring, my lady--that I should say so! No, I reckon I can't complain;
but oh, my lady! they foxes, and they weasels! They do tell me that
the old vixen from Cornham Brake hath five cubs; and I can't abide a
vixen--never could. And they weasels--they'm small, but they'm worse
than foxes. Now there's my Bucky. He can't bide home, he saith, these
fine days, but must go and lie out. I says to mun, 'Bucky,' I says,
''tis very well for the likes of her ladyship to lie out every day,
but _you_ should bide home to bury.' But no, he would go. 'Well then,
Bucky,' I says, 'I reckon that you'll grow a pair of horns like his
lordship, brow, bay, and trey, Bucky,' I says, 'and turn to bay when
the weasel's after 'ee.' And with that he layeth back his ears and
away he goeth--Flossy-a, come back, will 'ee, or I'll give you what
vor! Now there's that Flossy, my lady, so like to her father as my two
ears. She won't bide close to bury; and they do tell me that the vixen
to Cornham has moved this way. It won't do, my lady, it won't do. Oh
dear, dear, dear!" And she stopped for want of breath.

"Well, good evening, Bunny," said the Hind very kindly, "I must take
my little son home. I shall see you again very soon."

"And good evening to your ladyship," answered Bunny, "and good evening
to you, my pretty dear. Ah! you'm his lordship's son sure enough. I
mind the time----"

But the Hind had moved on out of hearing, for when once an old
Doe-Rabbit begins to talk she never stops. Then presently the Calf
said: "Mother, who is his lordship?" And she answered: "He is your
father, my darling. For the Red-Deer are lords of this forest, and he
is the lord of them all. And brow, bay, trey is the coronet that every
good Stag wears, and which you too shall wear in due time, when you
grow up." And he said no more, for to his mind there was nothing on
earth half so beautiful as she was, and he asked no better than to
grow up to be such another.




CHAPTER II


Now the very next day the Hind led her Calf away from the combe where
they lay; and after travelling some little way, they met the most
beautiful bird that the Calf had ever seen. His plumage was all of
glossy black, which shone blue and green and purple in the sun, while
to set it off he had a patch of pure white on each wing, and a spot of
red above each eye; his tail was forked and bent outwards in two
graceful curves, and his legs were feathered to the very heel. He flew
towards them some little way, with an easy noiseless flight, and
lighted just in front of them, as handsome a fellow as you will see in
a summer's day.

"Well, good Master Blackcock," said the Hind, "has my lord not moved?"

"Not a step, my lady," said the bird; "he lieth so quiet as my wife
when she's sitting, though the flies do worrit mun terrible."

"Then come along, son," she said. And she led him on and presently
stopped and whispered, "Look." And there he saw such a sight as he had
never dreamed of; a great Stag nearly twice the size of his mother,
with horns half grown and the velvet black with flies, lying down
motionless but for constant twitching of his head. The Calf could not
see how big he was, till presently he rose on to his feet, and
stretched himself, throwing his horns right back, with a mighty yawn.
Then he stood for a minute or two blinking rather sleepily, but always
shaking his head and wincing under the torment of the flies. His back
was as broad as a bullock's and his coat shone with good living; and
the little Calf, looked with all his eyes, for he had made up his mind
then and there to stand just like that and to stretch himself just
like that, when he had grown to be such a fine stag as that.

But presently the Hind led him away and asked the Blackcock, "And
where is my sister?" And the Blackcock led them on, and after a time,
to the Calf's delight, they came in sight of two more Hinds and
another little Calf. And all three caught the wind of them and came
forward to meet them. One of the Hinds was very big and grey, and she
had no Calf, but the other was smaller and bright red, and had at her
foot as sweet a little Calf as ever you saw; and it was the smaller of
the two Hinds that came to them first. Then both of the mothers laid
their Calves down, and began to talk, but they had hardly exchanged a
word, when the old grey Hind broke in.

"So it's you, Tawny, is it?" she said; "and you have brought a Calf
with you, I see. I suppose I must ask, is it a stag or a hind?"

"A stag, Aunt Yeld," said the Lady Tawny (for that was the name of our
Calf's mother); "do look at him for a minute. He does look so sweet in
his bed."

"A stag, is it?" said Aunt Yeld with a little sniff. "Well, I suppose
if people must have calves they had better have stags. Ruddy's here is
a hind, but I never could see the attraction of any calf myself." For
Aunt Yeld, like some old maids (but by no means like all) that have no
children of their own, thought it the right thing to look down on
Calves; and indeed she was rather a formidable old lady. She had two
very big tushes in her upper jaw, which she was constantly showing,
and she made a great point (when she was not flurried) of closing the
claws of her hoofs very tight, and letting her hind-feet fall exactly
where her fore-feet had fallen, which she knew to be the way of a
stag.

"And now that you have brought your calves here," continued Aunt Yeld,
"I may as well tell you that the sooner you take them away the better,
for there is a Greyhen here with a brood, who never ceases to pester
me with enquiries about a poult which she has lost. It's not my
business to look after people's poults; if they can't take care of
them themselves, they had better not have them, I say. The bird's an
idiot, I think. I questioned her pretty closely, and she really seemed
not very clear whether she had really lost a poult or not."

But the two Mother-Hinds looked at their calves and said:

"Poor thing;" and Ruddy's Calf which was feeling perhaps a little
lonely, uttered a plaintive little bleat.

"Ruddy," said Aunt Yeld severely, "if your child is going to make that
noise, I really must request you to--bless my heart, there's that
Greyhen again. No, bird, I have _not_ seen your poult."

And there sure enough was the poor old Greyhen, looking sadly dowdy
when compared with her mate, the Blackcock, with half a dozen fluffy
little poults round her. She was evidently anxious, for she turned
her head so quickly this way and that to keep them all in sight that
it nearly made the Calves giddy.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, my lady," she said very humbly, and turned
round. But the Lady Tawny walked after her, and asked what was the
matter.

"Oh, my lady," said the Greyhen, "I didn't mean no harm, but do 'ee
tell me, have 'ee seen my little poult? My lady Yeld axed me so many
questions that I got fairly mazed, and I've counted my poults times
and times till I hardly know how many they be. For I'm not so young as
I was, my lady, and I've brought up many families. My first mate he
was shot, if you mind, my lady; butiful bird he was too. And a pigeon
passed just now and I axed him to count, but they never have but two
eggs in their nestes, he saith, so he can't count more than two. And
the old Bucky was nigh here, and I axed he. 'Bless your life,
neighbour,' he saith, 'my Bunny has so many children that I've a given
up counting.' But it's not for me to stand talking with your ladyship;
though there's one poult missing, I'm sure of that."

"Poor soul," said the Hind very gently, "I am afraid that I have not
seen your poult. I am so sorry."

"Ah! bless your ladyship's kind heart," said the Greyhen. "You was
always--mercy on us, there 'a is. Stand over them, my lady, for
mercy's sake, stand over them?" And she crouched close to the ground
with abject terror in her eyes, while the poults, frightened to death,
hid themselves all round her.

For far above them against the glorious blue sky hung a little speck,
with quick, nervous wings that fluttered and paused, and fluttered and
paused. And it slanted down to right, and slanted back to left, as
though it had been swung by a cord from the heavens; then it fluttered
its wings and paused once more. But the Hind stood over the Greyhen
and poults, so that they should not be seen; and all the time the
Greyhen kept gasping out little broken words.

"Oh, they blue Hawks! Oh, they blue Hawks! Oh, the roog! 'Twas he that
did it--sure enough--Oh, the blue roog!"

Then the little speck made a great lunge forward, fluttered for a
moment, and passed away out of sight; and the Hind stepped back very
gently, and said: "Quite safe now. Good-day, mistress. Take care of
the poults."

"Bless your kind heart, and good-day to your ladyship," answered the
Greyhen. "I have six poults yet, I'm sure 'tis six now, and that's a
many to wash and tend and feed; but when they'm grown you may depend
they shall always help your ladyship, if I can teach them. Good-day,
my lady, and thank you, and may you have good luck with your blessed
little son."

Now all this time you may be sure that the Hind had kept a constant
eye towards the spot where her Calf was lying, the more so since she
could see Aunt Yeld peering through the grass at him. So she went
straight back to kiss him as soon as the Greyhen was gone, lest Aunt
Yeld's grey face might have frightened him; but he wasn't frightened
at her in the least. And Aunt Yeld for two whole steps quite forgot to
walk like a stag, and said, "I must do you the justice to observe,
Tawny, that he is a very handsome little fellow." Then she turned
away, blowing out her lips to show her tushes and putting on the
stag's gait as nearly as she could, and made a vicious bite at a
little blade of grass, as she had seen Stags bite at a turnip; which
did not become her pretty neck (for Hinds are always pretty, however
old) half as much as the graceful nibble which was natural to her. But
it was all make-believe, and if she had spoken her heart she would
have said: "I think that your Calf is the greatest darling I ever saw,
and oh, how I wish I were you!"

Then Aunt Yeld turned round and said: "Now you two mustn't think of
going. You are not fit to take care of yourselves, so you must stay
with me, and I'll take care of you." You see she had quite forgotten
what she said at first, for she had really a kind heart, though
nothing could keep her from patronising every one.

So for many days they lived together, and Aunt Yeld always posted
herself up wind of them to keep watch over them; and if our soldiers
in their red coats were sentries half as good as she, they would be
the best in the world. Now and again, though very seldom, the great
Stag would join them and lie by them all day, chewing the cud and
shaking his great head, which grew bigger every day. But he never
uttered a word, unless it was to say, "Very good that growing wheat
was this morning, to be sure," to which the Hind would answer, "I am
so glad, dearest;" or it would be, "The turnips on Yarner farm are
not coming on well in this dry weather, I am told; it's very annoying,
for I was looking forward to my turnips," and then the Hind would say,
"I am so sorry, dearest. How I hope it will rain soon!" For old stags
are perhaps rather too fond of their dinners.

Once only he showed himself quite different, and that was when one day
the Blackcock flew up to say that all the hills were coming down. Now
the way the Blackcock got the idea into his head was this. He had been
taking a bath in the dust at the foot of a great sheet of screes, the
loose, flat stones on the hill-side which you have often seen on the
moor, and had enjoyed it greatly, fluffing out his feathers and
flapping his great wings. But while he was in the middle of it a
Jackdaw came flying overhead, and seeing this great ball of feathers
rolling about, pitched down upon the screes to see what strange thing
it might be. And as he came hopping down to look at it closer, he
displaced one little stone, which displaced another little stone, and
that another, until quite a number of stones were set moving, and came
rushing down for twenty feet like a tiny cataract, close to the
Blackcock's ear. Whereupon the Jackdaw flapped off cawing with fright,
and the Blackcock flew away screaming to tell the deer that all the
hills were coming down.

But when he came the old Stag stood up at once and said: "Lady Yeld,
take the lead; Ruddy and Tawny, follow her. Steadily now, no
hurrying!" Then they moved on a little way and stopped, the Stag
always remaining behind them; for they could see that the hills were
not coming down before them, and therefore they must have begun to
fall behind them, if the Blackcock spoke truth. And that was why the
Stag remained behind, to be nearest to the danger, as a gentleman
should be. And some day, if you go into the army, you will learn that
in a retreat the rearguard is the post of greatest danger; and you
must read the story of the retreat of Sir John Moore's army to Corunna
and Vigo, and see what great things Uncle Charlie's regiment did
there.

The Deer stopped for a time, and at last the Stag said: "I can see
nothing, hear nothing, and wind nothing. Are you _quite_ sure the
hills are all coming down, Blackcock? I think that you must have made
some mistake." For the old Stag was a great gentleman, and always very
civil and courteous. But Aunt Yeld, who was quick of temper, stamped
on the ground, and said almost out loud: "Bah! I believe the bird's as
great an idiot as his wife."

The Blackcock looked very foolish, and was so much confused that he
did not know what to answer; but the Lady Tawny said kindly: "Thank
you, Blackcock, for coming. You mustn't let us keep you from your
dinner." And though it was not his dinnertime, he was so glad of the
excuse that he flew straight away to his wife, and told her all about
it. But all she said was: "So you went and told his lordship, did 'ee;
and what about me and my poults if the world cometh to an end? It's
like 'ee, it is, to go disturbing her blessed ladyship and her sweet
little son with your stories. But never a word for me, oh dear me no,
who slave for the poults morning, noon, and night; oh dear, oh dear,"
and so on for half an hour, till the Blackcock almost made up his mind
never to have a dust-bath again. For the poults had been rather
troublesome that morning, and the Greyhen's temper was a little upset
in consequence. Thus you see that the Blackcock had an unpleasant time
of it; and perhaps it served him right.

But except on this one occasion the Stag never bestirred himself;
behaving very lazily, as I have told you, and never opening his mouth
except to munch his food or talk of it. He never spoke a word to the
Calf, for old stags are not very fond of calves; and you may be sure
that the Calf never said a word to him, for he was terribly afraid of
him; nor was he far wrong, for an old stag, while his head is growing,
is almost as irritable as an old gentleman with a gouty toe. The only
difference between the two is this, that the stag can eat and drink as
much as he pleases, and do nothing but good to his head, while the
more a gouty old gentleman eats and drinks, the worse for his toe. And
it is just because they cannot eat and drink as much as they please
that gouty old gentlemen are more irritable than stags; and I for one
don't pity them, for a man is made to think of better things than his
food and drink.

But if he could not talk to the Stag, he made great friends with
Ruddy's Calf, who was the sweetest, gentlest little thing that you can
imagine. And though she was a little smaller than he was, she could do
nearly everything that he could. They ran races, and they tried which
could jump the higher and which could spring the farther, and she was
as fast and as active as he was. But one day he must needs make her
try which could butt the other the harder. So they butted each other
gently two or three times, and he liked it so much that he took a
great run and butted her hard, and hurt her, though he had not meant
it. Then she cried, "Maa-a-a! You're very rude and rough. It's a shame
to treat a little hind so; I shan't play any more." Of course they
soon made it up again, but his mother told him to remember that she
was only a little hind. And he remembered it, but he could not help
thinking that it was far better to be a little stag.




CHAPTER III


One day they were lying out in the grass as usual, and our little Calf
was having a great game of romps with the little Hind. The Stag was
not with them, but Aunt Yeld was standing sentry, when all of a sudden
she came back in a great fluster, not at all like a stag, as she was
always trying to be.

"Quick, quick, quick!" she said. "I can wind them and I can see them.
Call your Calves and let us go. Quick, quick!"

Then the two mothers rose up in a terrible fright. "Quick," said Aunt
Yeld again. "Run away as fast as you can!"

"But our Calves can't keep up if we go fast," pleaded the two mothers.

"Bless the Calves, I never thought of that," said Aunt Yeld. "Wait a
minute; look!"

Then they looked down across the rolling waves of grass flecked by the
shadows of the flying clouds, and a mile and a half away they saw a
moving white mass, with a dark figure before it and another dark
figure behind it. The mass stood in deep shadow, for a cloud hung over
it; but the cloud passed away and then the sun flashed down upon it,
and what the Deer saw (for they have far better eyes than you or I)
was this. Twenty-five couples of great solemn hounds trotting soberly
over the heather with a horseman in a white coat at their heads and
another at their sterns, and the coats of hounds and horses shining as
glossy as their own. A fresh puff of wind bore a wave of strange scent
to the nostrils of the Deer, and our little Calf snuffed it and
thought it the most unpleasant that he had ever tasted. "Remember it,
my son," whispered his mother to him, "nasty though it be, and beware
of it."

But Aunt Yeld stood always a little in advance, talking to herself. "I
passed just in front of the place where they are now on my way back
from breakfast this morning," she murmured. "I trust that scent has
failed by this time. Ah!"

And as she spoke some of the hounds swung suddenly with one impulse
towards them, but the horseman behind them galloped forward quick as
thought, and turned them back; and there came on the wind the sound
of a shrill yelp, which made all three of the Hinds to quiver again.
Then the mass began to move faster than before, and the Deer watched
it go further and further away from them till at last it settled down
to its first pace and vanished out of sight.

"Well, that is a mercy," said Aunt Yeld with a deep sigh. "I thought
it was full early yet for those detestable creatures to begin their
horrible work again. I think that we are safe now, but I'll just make
sure in case of accidents."

And with that she began to trot about in the strangest fashion. For
she made a great circle to the track by which she had come back from
feeding in the early morning, and ran back along it for some way, and
then she turned off it, and after a time made another circle which
brought her to a little stream. Then she ran up the water and made
another circle which brought her back again.

"There," she said, "if they do follow us, that will puzzle them." But
the Lady Tawny had been looking at her Calf all the time, and now she
spoke: "I am afraid to stay here any longer, Aunt Yeld. I will take my
Calf far away to a quiet spot that I know of, and do you stop with
sister and look after her."

So they parted, and very sad they were at parting. She led her Calf
away slowly, that he might not tire, but they had not gone very far
when there ran past them a great Buck-Rabbit. He neither saw nor heard
them, for his eyes were starting out of his head with fright; and he
went on only for a little way and then lay down and squealed most
miserably. Then they heard a faint sound rather like the yelp that
they had heard from the hound, but much smaller; and presently there
came five little bits of brown bodies, long, and lithe and slender,
racing along on their tiny short legs far faster than you would have
thought possible. They were following the line of the Rabbit, and the
old mother Weasel led the way, speaking to the scent as loud as she
could (and that was not very loud), "Forward, children, forward,
forward," and the four little Weasels joined in chorus, "Forward,
forward, forward"; then she cried, "Blood, children, blood," and they
answered at the top of their pipes, "Blood, blood, blood, blood." And
their fierce little eyes flashed, and their sharp little teeth gleamed
as they dashed away through the grass; and I am afraid that the
Buck-Rabbit had but a poor chance with them, though he was nearly as
big as the whole five of them put together. For I suppose that, for
its size, there is no creature on earth so fierce and bloodthirsty as
a weasel; but remember, too, that he is also the pluckiest little
beast that there is, and would fight you and me if we drove him too
far.

The Calf was very much puzzled. "Why doesn't the Rabbit run on,
mother, if he is afraid of the Weasels?" he said. "I should have run
on as far as I could. Will they leave him alone because he lies down
and squeals?"

But she answered sadly, "No, no! and, my son, if ever it should befall
you that you must run for your life, as I fear may be only too likely,
then keep up a brave heart and run on till you can run no more."

And he answered, "Yes, mother," and thought to himself that he would
fight to the end too; for he hoped one day to grow into a good stag
and have horns to fight with; and besides he was a brave little
fellow. And, for my part, I think that the Calf was right; and if (as
I hope may never be) after you are grown up, disappointment should lie
in wait for you at every turn, and fate and your own fault should hunt
you to despair, then run on bravely, and when you can run no more,
face them and dare them to do their worst; but never, never, never
lie down and squeal.

So they journeyed on for three whole days, often stopping that the
Calf might rest. And on the third day as they were passing along one
side of a combe, they saw another strange sight. For on the other side
the rock came through the soil, and there at the foot of the rock
stood a ruddy-coloured creature with a white throat, and prick ears,
and a sharp nose, and a bushy tail that tapered to a point and ended
in a white tag. She carried a rabbit in her mouth, and round her stood
five little Cubs, jumping and scrambling and playing, and crying out,
"Rabbit for dinner, rabbit for dinner!" For a time she looked at them
with the rabbit still in her mouth while they danced around her, till
presently one ran up behind one of his brothers and rolled him over,
and the other lay on his back kicking and struggling while the first
pretended to kill him; and then a third came up and caught one of them
by the scruff of the neck and made him open his mouth so wide that you
would have thought he could never have shut it again. And then the old
Vixen laid the rabbit on the ground, and said, "Worry, worry, worry!"
and the Cubs dashed at it and began biting at it and tearing, and
pulling, and scratching, till they rent it all to pieces. Then one
little fellow got hold of a whole hind-leg and ran away to eat it by
himself, and the rest cried out, "Greedy, greedy!" and ran after him
to take it from him; and they scuffled and worried and snarled till
you would have thought that they meant to eat each other up as well as
the rabbit. But it was only play, though rough play, for Foxes are
rough fellows; and all the time the old Vixen sat on her haunches
smiling and saying, "That's my little Cubs! that's my little Cubs!"

Then the Hind and Calf passed on, and she led him into a great deep
wood of oak-coppice, where there was hardly a tree that was not oak,
except now and again a mountain-ash. And they passed through the
bright silver stems of the young trees and under the heavy foliage of
the old ones; till they saw a mountain-ash shake its golden berries
over their heads, and came to a hollow where a tiny stream came
trickling down, almost hidden among hart's-tongues. There she laid him
down; and this wood was their new home.

Soon after, the dry weather came to an end, and the South-West wind
came laden with rain from the sea. But the Hind and Calf lay sheltered
in the wood, and heard the wind singing above them, and saw the scud
drifting slowly in great columns down the valley. They roamed far
through the wood, for it seemed to cover the valley's side for miles,
and he watched her as she looked about for ivy, which was her
favourite food, and envied her when she reared up to pluck some
tempting morsel hanging from the oak trees. Nor would he let her have
all the good things to herself, for he would nuzzle at the green
leaves between her lips and pretend to enjoy them greatly.

A very happy peaceful life it was, for they were never disturbed,
though occasionally they saw company. They had not been there but very
few days, when very early in the morning they saw the old Vixen come
stealing into the wood with a Cub in her mouth. She looked so weary
and footsore, that though deer do not like rough, unmannerly creatures
such as foxes, which feed on flesh, the Hind could not help saying,
"Why, Mrs. Vicky, you look dreadfully tired."

But the Vixen hardly turned her head, and then only to answer very
roughly, "No, I am not tired, I am not tired," though after a time she
added "thank you" in rather a surly tone; for in Devon nobody is
altogether uncivil. And she went plodding on.

"Have they been disturbing your earth?" asked the Hind. "I hope the
Cubs are all well." Then the Vixen could not help stopping to say:
"Yes, they'm well. This is the last of mun. Twenty mile and more have
I gone back and 'vor with mun this blessed night. They was rather a
late litter, you see, and I was obliged to carry mun. But I'm not
tired, oh no, I am not tired--my lady." And she went on again doggedly
with her Cub, though they could see that she was so tired that she
could hardly move. And let me tell you that it was a great stretch of
civility for the Vixen to call the Hind "my lady," for Foxes are very
independent, and like a great many other people think that they must
show their independence by being uncivil; whereby they only prevent
others from seeing what brave, patient creatures they really are.

The very next morning they saw a new visitor come in, a grey old
person as big as the Vixen, with a long sharp nose, and a deal of
white about his face, a very little short tail, and four short clumsy
legs. He was waddling along slowly, and grumbling to himself: "'Tisn't
often that I spake, but spake I will. 'Tis mortal hard that he should
come and take my house. 'Tis my house, I made mun, and I digged mun.
'Tisn't right; 'tisn't rasonable."

"What is it, old Grey?" said the Hind.

The Badger looked up and stared. Then he said very slowly "Aw!"
drawing out the word till he could collect his wits. "Well, look 'ee,
'tis like this. Two days agone,--I think 'twas two days--the old
Dog-Fox--you know mun, he that hath so much white to his brush--well,
he cometh to me, and saith he, 'Brocky,' he saith--that's a name he
calleth me, Brocky, friendly like, though he warn't no friend o' mine
that I know of--Well, he saith, 'Brocky, I know of so pretty a nest of
Rabbits as a Badger could wish to see. I can't dig mun out,' he saith,
'but you can. Oh! what I would give to be able to dig like you,
Brocky!' he saith. 'Come 'long wi' me, and I'll show 'ee.' Well, now
I'll tell 'ee which way we went."

"No, never mind that," said the Hind, "we musn't keep you, you know."

"Aw!" said the Badger, "well, we come to the bury, and wonderful sweet
they rabbits did smell, sure enough. 'Now,' he saith, 'I'll leave
'ee.' And I digged the rabbits out; I forget how many there
was--eight or nine I think--I ate mun all up, I know, and very sweet
they was, I won't deny that. And them I went 'oom, but bless your
life, when I got there I couldn't go into mun. Oh! 'twas terrible sure
enough; 'twas more than my poor nose could stand. And the old Fox he
looketh out and saith, 'Tis wonderful kind of you, Brocky,' he saith,
'to give me your house. Mrs. Vicky liketh it wonderful, she doth. Ah!
I wish I could dig like you, Brocky,' he saith. And he's taken my
house, and here I be. 'Tisn't right; 'tisn't rasonable."

And he waddled away growling out, "'Tisn't rasonable," for, being a
Devonshire Badger, he was of course fond of long words, though he
might not always understand their meaning. And the Calf could hardly
help laughing as he saw the poor, stupid old fellow blundering on his
way.

But if he fared ill, the Vixen and her Cubs fared well enough. The
Cubs grew so fast that they began to look after themselves, and they
were often to be seen wandering about the wood, grubbing after beetles
and gobbling up the fallen berries. And the Calf grew also, for he was
now four months old, you must remember; and of all the months in his
life, those first four were, I suspect, the happiest.




CHAPTER IV


Early one morning, it must have been almost the last week in
September, the peace of the oak-coppice was disturbed by a terrible
clamour. It began with a single deep "Ough, ough, ough!" then another
voice chimed in with rather a shriller note, and then another and then
another, and then a whole score more joined them in one thundering
chorus. And the Hind started to her feet in alarm, and led the Calf
out of the wooded valley to the open moor above. There they stood
listening; while the whole valley was filled with the tumult, as if a
hundred demons had been let loose into it. Now and again it ceased for
a moment, and all was still; then it began again with "Ough, ough,
ough!"; and it was hard to say exactly where the sound came from, for
one side of the valley said it would hold it no longer, and tossed it
over to the other, and the other said it wouldn't hold it either and
tossed it back, so that the noise kept hovering between the two in
the most bewildering way. But after a short time the clamour drew
nearer to the Hind and Calf, and presently out came one of the
Fox-cubs, with his tongue lolling and his back crooked, looking
desperately weary and woe-begone. He went on for a little distance, as
if to go away over the moor, but soon stopped and flung back with
desperation into the covert. And the Hind trotted gently away, anxious
but not alarmed. "They are not after us, my son, I think," she said.
Then the noise drew closer and closer, and out bounded a whole pack of
hounds, with bristles erect and gleaming eyes, throwing their tongues
furiously on the line of the Cub. They flashed over the scent for
fifty yards, still yelling with all their might, and then they fell
silent and spread out in all directions. Presently they recovered the
line of the Cub, and turned back into the covert yelling louder than
ever; but meanwhile two wild puppies had crossed the scent of the Hind
and Calf and started after them as fast as they could run.

Then the Hind turned and fled and the Calf with her, as he had never
fled before; but his poor little legs began speedily to tire, and he
could not have held out for much longer, when suddenly he found
himself poked down quick as thought by his mother's nose into a tuft
of fern. "Lie still, my son, till I come back," she whispered; and so
she left him. And there he lay panting, while the voices of the
puppies came closer and closer to his hiding-place; but he never
moved, for his mother had bid him lie still. Then they rushed past him
with a wild cry, for his mother had waited to lead them after herself;
and their voices died away, and all was silent. Presently he heard a
dull sound, coming drum, drum, drum, louder and louder and louder; and
then the earth began to shake, and a huge dark body seemed to be
coming almost on to the top of him, but suddenly swerved aside just in
time, and left him unharmed. Then the drumming died away, and after a
time he heard a dismal yelping such as he had once heard before; but
he did not know that it was a man and horse that had nearly galloped
on to the top of him, and would have galloped quite on the top of him
if the horse had not shied, nor that the man had given the puppies a
thrashing for running a deer when they had been told to run a fox.

He was beginning to hope that his mother would soon come back, when he
heard two voices quite unlike any that he had ever heard before, and
saw riding towards him two people. One was a man with fair hair and
blue eyes, and a face burned brown by the sun, and the other a girl, a
year or thereabout younger than the man. She, too, had bright blue
eyes, and very fair hair, and a very pretty face--at least the man
seemed to think so, for he was always looking at it--though of course
the Calf, having never seen such creatures before, could not judge if
they were pretty or ugly. They came on till they were only at a little
distance from him, and the man pulled up and, pointing to him, said
very low, "Look." And the girl whispered, "What a little duck! I wish
I could take him home with me." But the man said, "No, no, no. His
mother will come and take him home presently, and the sooner we leave
him alone the better she will be pleased." So they rode away, and he
could hear them talking as they rode, for they seemed to have a great
deal to say to each other. But what they talked about, and how they
came to stay alone on the hill when the hounds were running down in
the valley, is more than I can tell you.

Before very long his mother came back to him, and you may guess how
glad he was to see her, and how she rejoiced to see him. After looking
round to see that all was quiet, she led him away over the heather,
and then down a very steep hill-side among stunted gorse and loose
stones, hot and burning from the sun. "See, my son," she said, "this
is the first time that you have been chased by hounds, but I fear that
it may not be the last. Now, remember, no hound can run fast over this
short gorse, for his feet are soft; while we do not mind it, for our
feet are hard. And these loose stones are almost better for us than
the gorse, for our scent hardly lies on them and they hurt a hound's
feet almost as much as the gorse." So they went to the bottom of the
hill, and there was a peat-stream singing its song; but all that the
Calf could hear of it was this:--

    _I carry no scent, come here, come here;_
    _I am the friend of the wild Red-Deer._

The Hind led him up a shallow for a little way, and then she jumped
out on to the opposite bank and followed it upwards for a little way,
and then she jumped into the water again and went down for a full
hundred yards till they came to a comfortable shady spot, where they
both left the water and lay down together. "Now, my son," she said,
"here is another little lesson for you to learn. The song of the water
is true; it carries no scent, and no hound can follow us in it unless
he can see us. But a hound will always try the bank to find out where
we have left the water; if we enter it up the stream he will try
upward, and if we enter it down the stream he will try downward. So
always, if you have time, try to make them work upward when you mean
to go down, and downward when you mean to go up, as I have shown you
to-day." And like a wise little fellow he took care to remember what
she taught him.

They lay there together till the sun began to fall low, and then they
rose and went down to the water to cross it. And there what should
they see but a large shoal of little Fish with bright red spots, and
bands, like the marks of a finger, striping their sides from gills to
tail; for the stream was so clear that they could distinguish every
mark upon them. The little Fish seemed to be very anxious about
something, for they kept darting about, now spreading out and now all
coming together again; and the Calf could hear them whispering, "Shall
we ask her? Shall we, shall we?" And at last one little Fish rose,
with a little splash, and said in a watery little voice:

"Oh! please can you tell us how far it is to the sea?"

"Why, my little fellow," said the Hind, "surely it isn't time for you
to go to sea yet?"

"Oh, no," said the little Salmon, "for we haven't got our silver
jackets yet. But we are so looking forward to it. Will our silver
jackets come soon, do you think?"

"Not just yet, I expect," said the Hind kindly; "you must have
patience, you know, for a little time, only for a little time."

"Oh," said the little Salmon, in a sadly disappointed tone; and the
whole shoal began to move away, but almost directly came back and
began popping up to the surface of the water by dozens, saying, "Thank
you," "thank you," "thank you." For little Salmon are not only very
well-bred but very well-mannered besides, which all well-bred
creatures ought to be, but unfortunately very often are not.

So they left the little Salmon, and went their way to the cliffs that
overhang the sea, where they made their home in a great plantation of
Scotch firs, so closely cropped by wind and salt that they cannot grow
up into trees but run along the ground almost like ivy. And let me
warn you, by the way, when you ride fast through these stunted
plantations, as I hope you may many times, to grip your saddle tight
with your legs and keep your toes turned in, or you may find yourself
on the ground on the broad of your back; which will not hurt you in
the least, but may lose you your start in a good run. Well, here they
lay, and very much the Calf liked his new home; but they had not been
there for three days when one morning they heard faint sounds of a
great trampling of hoofs. It lasted for a long time, but they lay
quite still, though the Hind was very uneasy. Then suddenly they heard
the voice of hounds rise from the coverts on the cliff below them, and
a man screaming at the top of his voice. The sounds came nearer, and
then there was a great clatter of branches, and the great Stag, whom
they had known on the moor, came bounding leisurely through the
thicket. His head was thrown back and his mouth wide open; and very
proud and very terrible he looked as he cantered straight up to them.
He jerked his head impatiently at them, and said very sternly, "Off
with you! quick!" And the Hind jumped up in terror and the Calf with
her; and as they ran off they could see the old Stag lie down in their
place with his great horns laid back on his shoulders, and his chin
pressed tight to the ground.

But they had no time to lose, for the hounds were coming closer; so
they bustled for a little way through the thicket, and then the Hind
led the Calf into a path, because of course his little legs could not
keep pace with hers in the tangle of the plantation. Thus they ran on
for a little way, till they heard the sound of a horse coming towards
them, when they turned into the thicket again and lay down. And
presently a man in a red coat came trotting by with his eyes fixed on
the ground, and meeting the hounds stopped them at once. Then he
pulled out a horn, blew one single note, and trotted away with the
hounds, just three couple of them, at his heels.

But the Hind and Calf lay still; and presently they heard two more
horses coming gently along the path, and two human voices chattering
very fast. And who should ride by but the pretty girl whom he had seen
looking at him a few days before! A man was riding with her, but not
the man that he had seen with her before, for this one was dark, and
besides he was rather older; but as they passed they saw her smile at
him, and open her pretty eyes at him, in a way that seemed to please
him very well.

So they rode on till their chattering could be heard no more; and then
another man came riding by on a grey horse, quite alone, whom the Calf
recognised as the fair man that had been with the girl when first he
saw her; and very doleful and miserable he seemed to be. For he
stopped on the path opposite to them, looking down at the ground with
a troubled face, and kept flicking savagely at the heather with his
whip, till at last he flicked his poor horse on the nose by mistake,
and was obliged to pat him and tell him how sorry he was. How long he
might have stopped there no one knows; but all of a sudden the Hind
and Calf heard a wild sound of men hallooing, and the horn sounding in
quick, continuous notes. Then the man's face brightened up directly,
and he caught hold of the grey horse by the head and galloped off as
fast as he could go.

Directly after this, the Deer heard a mighty rush of hoofs all
hastening to the same spot, the sound growing gradually fainter and
fainter until all was still. But they lay fast till a white Sea-gull
flew high over their heads chirping out, "They're gone, they're gone,"
in a doleful voice; not, you know, because he was sorry that all the
men and horses were gone, but because Sea-gulls, for some reason, can
never say anything cheerfully. And then the Hind arose and led the
Calf cautiously out of the plantation to the open moor; and as they
went they saw a long string of horses, reaching for two or three
miles, toiling painfully one after the other; while far ahead the
hounds, like white specks, kept creeping on and on and on, with a
larger speck close to them which could be nothing else than a grey
horse. So the Hind led the Calf on to a quiet combe, and there they
lay down in peace.

And when the sun began to sink they saw, far away, the hounds and a
very few horses with them, returning slowly and wearily home. But
presently they were startled by voices much closer to them, and they
saw the fair man on the grey horse and the pretty girl, riding side by
side. The Hind was a little alarmed at first, but there was no
occasion for it; for the pair were riding very close together, so
close that his hand was on her horse's neck, and they seemed to be far
too much occupied with each other to think of anything else. So they
passed on; and after they were gone there came a loose horse, saddled
and bridled, but covered all over with mire, and with a stirrup
missing from the saddle. And presently he lay down and rolled over
and over till the girths parted with a crack and left the saddle on
the ground; then he got up, hung up one hind-leg in the reins, and
kicked himself free; then he lay down again, and rubbed his cheeks
against the heather until he had forced the bridle over his head; then
he gave himself a great shake to make quite sure that he had got rid
of everything, and at last he went down to the water and drank, and
wandered off grazing as happy as could be.

Last of all came a man tramping wearily over the heather, with a
stirrup in his hand; but the Calf hardly recognised him as the dark
man whom he had seen in the morning, for his hat was crushed in, and
his clothes caked with mire from head to foot. And he toiled on,
looking round him on all sides, till he caught his foot in a tussock
of grass, and fell on his nose; and what he said when he got up I
don't know, though I might guess, for he looked very cross.

So he too passed out of sight, and the sun went down, and the mist
stole over the face of the moor, and the Hind and Calf were left alone
with the music of the flowing water to sing them to sleep. But they
never saw that old Stag again.




CHAPTER V


And now the grass of the forest turned fast from green to yellow, the
blossom faded off the heather, and the leaves of the woods turned to
gold and to russet and to brown, and fluttered down to the kind earth
which had raised them up in the spring. The nights too grew chillier
and chillier; but the Hind and Calf did not mind that, for their coats
only grew the thicker and warmer to protect them. But what was far
more terrible was the hideous roaring that continued all night long in
all quarters of the moor. It was some days before the Calf found out
what it was, for his mother seemed always dreadfully frightened unless
he were well hidden away. But once when she had left him for a short
time snugly tucked away on a combe's side, he saw a great Stag come
down the combe driving a little herd of half a dozen Hinds before him.
The Calf was astonished at the sight of him, for the Stag was quite
different now from any that he had seen in the summer. The glossy
coat was gone, and the great round body was lean, ragged, and tucked
up, and stained with half-dried mud. His neck again was twice its
usual size and looked still bigger under its great shaggy mane; and
his face was not noble and calm, but fierce and restless and furrowed
by two deep dark lines, so that altogether he was a most
disreputable-looking old fellow.

Presently he stopped at a little boggy spot by the water's side; and
there he reared up, and plunging his great antlers into the ground he
tore it up, and sent the black mire flying over his head. Then he
threw himself down into the bog and rolled in it and wallowed in it,
churning it up with horn and hoof, like a thing possessed. At last he
got up, all dripping and black, and stretching out his great neck,
till the hair of his mane hung straight and lank with the black drops
running from it, he roared and roared again with a voice so terrible
and unearthly that the Calf in his hiding-place shook with fright. And
no wonder, for I think that even you will be startled the first time
that you hear a big Stag belling.

Very soon an answering roar came from a distance, and another Stag,
as thin and fierce-looking as the first, but not quite so big, came
belling up the combe. And the great Stag left the Hinds and went
forward to meet him, looking very stately and grand. For he walked on
tip-toe, loftily and slowly, with his head thrown back, and his chin
high in air, while his eyes rolled with rage, and his breath spurted
forward in jets of steam through the cold, damp air, as he snorted
defiance. Then presently both Stags dropped their heads and made for
each other; and they fought with locked horns, shoving and straining
and struggling, backward and forward and round and round, till the
smaller Stag could fight no longer but turned and fled limping away,
with the blood flowing from a deep thrust in his flank. Then the great
Stag threw up his head and belled again with triumph, and huddling the
Hinds together once more, he drove them on before him.

For three weeks and more this roaring and fighting continued; for
Deer, you must know, put all the quarrelling of the year into a single
month; which sounds like a curious arrangement, but may after all be
better than that of certain other creatures, which fight the whole
year round. All this while the Calf's mother kept him carefully out of
the way of stags; but none the less he had visitors. For one day a
little brown bird with a long beak came flapping rather crookedly up
the combe as if uncertain whither to go next, and then suddenly making
up her mind, came down and lighted in front of the Calf's very nose.
He was a little astonished, but his mother gave the little bird her
kindest glance and said:

"Welcome back to Exmoor, Mistress Woodcock. How have you fared this
dry summer, and what passage had you over the sea?"

And the little bird answered with somewhat of a foreign accent and in
rather a sad voice, "I am safe and sound, my lady Hind, for we had
good weather; but there were a few that started before me, and are not
yet come, and I greatly fear that they were blown into the sea by a
storm. And the summer was so dry that many springs failed, and many
times I had to catch up my chicks and carry them one by one to new
feeding-grounds over the pine-forests and across the blue fiords. Ah!
you think much of Exmoor, but you have never seen Norway, where your
highest hills would be lost among our mountains, and your broadest
streams a trickle beside our rivers. We do not duck and dive there, my
lady Hind; we fly high and straight, and chirp for joy in our flight,
but in this grey England we have not the heart to chirp." And rising
with a _flip flap_ of her wings she flew silently and sadly away.

At length one day the Hind said: "Son, it is time for you to see some
more of your relations." So they set out together; and as they went
they passed by all the places which the Calf had known so well when he
was but a few weeks old. But they saw no deer, and when they looked
about for the Greyhen they could not see her either; nor would they
have heard anything of them, if the Hind had not bethought her of
going to see old Bunny. And they found her as usual sitting in front
of her bury, looking quite happy and comfortable, with her head a
little on one side.

"Why, my lady, you'm quite a stranger," she said when they greeted
her. "Lady Yeld and Lady Ruddy was axing for 'ee but two days agone,
and says they, 'Tell her we'm going to Dunkery'; and that's where
you'm going, I reckon, my lady. And Lady Ruddy's Calf is grown
wonderful, and a sweet, pretty little thing she is, but not so pretty
as yours, my lady. Look to mun, now, in his little brown coat, a
proper little buty. 'Tis just what I was saying to the old
Greyhen--let's see, what day was it?--well, I don't rightly mind the
day, but says I, 'Neighbour, her ladyship's little son--'"

"But where is the Greyhen gone, Bunny?" said the Hind.

"Well, I don't rightly know, my lady," answered Bunny. "She comed to
me a good whiles back, and she saith, 'Neighbour, the men's been here
shooting again, and I shall go.' But it was a good whiles back; I
think 'twas when I was rearing my fourth family,--for I have had two
more families since I seed your ladyship last, aye, and fine ones too.
And I've got a new mate, my lady. You mind my Bucky, my lady, he that
was always lying out--well, he went out one day and he never comed
home again, and I reckon the weasels catched mun. He was a good mate
was the old Bucky, but he was the half of a fule--that I should say
so--wouldn't never mind what I told mun. And what was I to do, my
lady? So I tooked another mate. 'Twas not a long courting, for he
comes to me, and, saith he--"

"But where did you say that the Greyhen was gone?" asked the Hind,
kindly.

"I think Clog's Down was the place that she said, my lady. But, bless
your life, she'll come back here, you may depend. For she's getting
up an old bird, my lady,--"

"And there's no place like home, Bunny," said the Hind.

"Aye," said Bunny, "and that's just what I was saying only yesterday
to the old Woodcock when she comed telling to me about Norway. 'Get
along with 'ee and your Norwayses,' I says; 'isn't Exmoor good enough
for 'ee? Many's the fine brood of Woodcocks that I've seen reared on
Exmoor, without never crossing the sea. Look at me,' I says; '_I_
don't go crossing the sea, and look to the broods I've reared.' And
now, let me think, how many broods is it?--"

But she took such a long time counting, that, though the Hind was
longing to hear, they were obliged to bid her good-day and go on their
way. Besides, to tell truth, the Calf was so much pleased when he
heard her speak of his brown coat that he was dying to find some one
to whom he could show it. And in the very first water that they
crossed he saw the little Salmon come hurrying towards them, and
called out to them, "Come and look at my brown coat."

But they answered all together, "Come and look at our silver jackets.
We've got our silver jackets, we've got our silver jackets! And the
rain will come down to-night, and we'll be off to the sea
to-morrow--hurrah!" And they leaped out of the water and turned head
over tail with joy, taking no more notice of the Calf's brown coat
than if it had been a rag of green weed.

So he passed on with his mother, a little disappointed, and away from
the yellow grass of the forest to the brown heather of Dunkery. And
there the heath was full of great stones, unlike any ground that he
had ever travelled over before, so that he had to be careful at first
how he trod. But he soon found that it was easy enough for him after
he had gone a little distance; and his mother led him slowly so that
he should have time to learn his way. So on they went to the very top
of the ridge, and there where the heather and grass grow tuft by tuft
among the brown turf-pits, in the heart of the bog, they found a herd
of Deer. Such a number of them there were as he had never dreamed of.
Great Stags, with three and four on top, like those that he had seen
fighting, were lying down, four and five together, in perfect peace,
and younger Stags with lighter heads and fewer points, and
Two-year-olds, proud as Punch of their first brow-antlers, and
Prickets, ever prouder of their first spires than the Two-year-olds,
and a score or more of Hinds, nearly all of them with Calves at foot;
and standing sentry over all was old Aunt Yeld.

"Come along, my dears," she said patronisingly, "the more the merrier.
You'll find a few dry beds still empty in the wet ground, where Ruddy
and her Calf are lying; but I warn you that you will have to move
before nightfall."

So they went, and found Ruddy and her Calf and lay down by them, for
you may be sure that mothers and Calves had a great deal to say to
each other. But as the evening began to close they heard a faint, low,
continuous hum from the westward, and all the hinds with one accord
left the bog, and went down into a deep, snug, sheltered combe,
clothed thick with dwarf oak-coppice, while the stags went to their
own chosen hiding-places. Soon the hum grew louder and louder, and
presently the rain began to fall in heavy drops, as the little Salmon
had foretold (though how they could foretell it, I know no more than
you); and then the hum changed to a roar as the Westerly Gale came up
in all his might and swept across the moor. And presently an old
Dog-Fox came in and shook himself and lay down not far from them on
one side, and a Hare came in and crouched close to them on the other,
and little birds driven from their own roosting-places flew trembling
into the branches above them; but not one dared to speak except in a
whisper, and then only to say, "What a terrible night!" For all night
long the gale roared furiously over their heads and the rain and scud
flew screaming before it; and once they heard something whistle over
their heads, crying wildly in a voice not unlike a sea-gull's, "Mercy,
mercy, mercy!" Then the little stream below them in the combe began to
swell and pour down fuller and fuller; and all round the hill a score
of other little streams swelled likewise, and came tearing down the
hill, adding their roar to the roar of the gale; so you may be sure
that the Salmon had a fine flood to carry them down to the sea.

When the Deer moved out in the morning they found the rain and wind
raging as furiously as ever, and the air full of salt from the spray
of the sea; and a few hundred yards to leeward of the combe they came
upon a little sooty Sea-bird, quite a stranger to them, lying gasping
on the ground. The poor little fellow could only say, "Mercy, mercy,
where is the sea, where is the sea? Where are my brother Petrels?"
Then he flapped one little wing feebly, for the other had been dashed
by the gale against a branch and broken, and gasped once more and lay
quite still; nor, though the deer gazed at him for long, did he ever
speak or move again. So when they had fed, the deer moved back to the
shelter of the combe and lay down there once more; and as the morning
grew the rain ceased, though the wind blew nearly as hard as ever. But
it was still a good hour before noon when the Hare suddenly jumped up
and stole out of the combe. A minute after her the Fox stood up,
listened for a moment, and stole out likewise, and almost directly
after him the deer all sprang to their feet; for they heard the deep
note of the hounds and saw their white bodies dashing into the combe
full of eagerness and fire. And if any one tells you that it is
incredible that Deer, Fox, and Hare should all be lying together as I
have said, you may tell him from me that I saw them with my own eyes
leave the combe one after another by the same path, on just such a
wild morning as I have described.

The deer moved quickly on to the hill and began to run away together;
but presently Aunt Yeld, and Ruddy and her Calf, and our Hind and her
Calf separated from the rest, and went away at a steady pace, for as
old Aunt Yeld said, "No hound can travel fast over Dunkery stones."
And, indeed, so fond was the old lady of these stones that, when she
got to the edge of them, she turned back over them again and took
Ruddy with her. But our Hind and her Calf moved away a mile or two
towards the forest, and finding no hounds in chase of them stopped and
rested.

But after half an hour or more Aunt Yeld came galloping up to them
alone, very anxious though not the least tired, and said, "I can't
shake them off. Come along quick!" Then they found that the hounds
were hard at their heels, and away they went, in the teeth of the
gale, at their best pace. And the Calf kept up bravely, for he was
growing strong, but they were pressed so hard that presently Aunt Yeld
left them and turned off by herself. Then by bad luck some of the
hounds forsook her line for that of his mother and himself, and drove
them so fast that for the first time in their lives they were obliged
to part company, and he was left quite alone. So on he ran by himself
till he came to a familiar little peat-stream, which was boiling down
over the stones like a torrent of brown ale; and in he jumped and ran
down, splashing himself all over. Before he had gone down it fifty
yards he felt so much refreshed that he quite plucked up heart, so he
followed the water till it joined a far bigger stream, crossed the
larger stream, climbed up almost to the top of the opposite side of
the combe, and lay down.

And when he had lain there for more than an hour he saw Aunt Yeld
coming down to the water two or three hundred yards above the place
where he lay, with her neck bowed and her grey body black with sweat,
looking piteously tired and weak. She jumped straight into the flooded
water and came plunging down; and only a few minutes behind her came
the hounds. The moment that they reached the water some of them leaped
in and swam to the other side, and they came bounding down both banks,
searching diligently as they ran. Then he saw Aunt Yeld stop in a deep
pool, and sink her whole body under the water, leaving nothing but her
head above it. She had chosen her place cunningly, where the bank was
hollowed out and the water was overhung by a little thorn bush that
almost hid her head from view. And he watched the hounds try down and
down; and he now saw that two horsemen were coming down the combe's
side after them, the men bending low over their saddles, hardly able
to face the gale, and the horses with staring eyes and heaving flanks,
almost as much distressed as Aunt Yeld herself. The men seemed to be
encouraging the hounds, though in the howling of the wind he could
hear nothing.

But the pack tried down and down by themselves, till at last they came
to the place where Aunt Yeld was lying; and there two of them stopped
as if puzzled; but she only sank her head a little deeper in the water
and lay as still as death, with her ears pressed back tight upon her
neck. Then at last the hounds passed on, though they were loth to
leave the spot, and followed the bank down below her. But presently
the Calf became aware, to his terror, that some of them were pausing
at the place where he himself had left the water, and, what was more,
were unwilling to leave it. And then a great black and tan hound
carried the line very, very slowly a few yards away from the bank up
the side of the combe, and said, "Ough!" and the hounds on the
opposite side of the stream no sooner heard him than they jumped in
and swam across to him; so that in half a minute every one of them was
working slowly up towards his hiding-place. He was so much terrified
that he hardly knew whether to lie still or to fly; but presently the
black and tan hound said "Ough!" once more with such a full, deep,
awful note that he could stand it no longer, but jumped up at once and
bounded up over the hill.

And then every hound threw up his head and yelled in a way which
brought his heart into his mouth, but he was soon out of their view
over the crest of the hill, and turning round set his head backward
for Dunkery. And as he went he saw the horsemen come struggling up the
hill, trying to call the hounds off, but unable to catch them. But he
soon felt that he had not the strength to carry him to Dunkery, so he
swung round again with the gale in his face, and then by great good
luck he caught the wind of other deer, and running on found that it
was Ruddy and her Calf.

By the time that he had joined them the men had stopped the hounds,
and were taking them back to try down the water again after Aunt Yeld.
But you may be sure that Aunt Yeld had not waited for them. On the
contrary, she had made the best of her time, for she had run up the
big water again, and turned from it up a smaller stream, and having
run up that, was lying down in the fervent hope that she was safe.

And safe she was; for as luck would have it the wind backed to the
south-east and began blowing harder than ever, with torrents of rain,
so that after another hour the Calf saw horsemen and hounds travelling
slowly and wearily home, as drenched and draggled and miserable as a
deer could wish to see them. And a little later his mother came and
found him, and though she too was terribly tired, she cared nothing
about herself in the joy of seeing him. Then after a time Aunt Yeld
came up too and joined them, and quite forgetting that it was not at
all like a stag to be soft-hearted, she came up to him and fondled
him, and said, "My brave little fellow, you have saved my life
to-day." So they made their way to the nearest shelter and curled up
together to keep each other warm, banishing all thought of the day's
adventures in their joy that they were safe.




CHAPTER VI


After this they were left in peace for a short time, but week after
week the hounds came to Dunkery or to the forest, and though the Deer
were not always obliged to run their hardest, yet it was seldom that
they had not to fly, at any rate for a time, for their lives. So after
a few weeks the Hind led the Calf back to the wood where they had made
the acquaintance of the Vixen and the Badger; and there they were left
alone. For there came a hard frost which covered the moor with white
rime, and, though it sometimes sent them far afield for food, still
saved them from annoyance by hounds. But the poor Blackbirds and
Thrushes suffered much, for they were weak for want of food; and often
the Calf would see them in the hedges crawling over the dead leaves,
unable to fly. And then the old Vixen would come round (for she was
still there, though all her Cubs were scattered), and pick up the
poor struggling little birds, and make what meal she could of them,
though there was little left of them but skin and bone; for she too
was ravenous with hunger.

But at last the frost broke up and the warm rain came, and the days
grew longer, and the sun gathered strength. So after a time they began
to wander over the skirt of the moor again, and thus one day they saw
a curious sight. For in the midst of the heather stood a number of
Greyhens, looking very sober, and modest and respectable, and round
them, in a ring worn bare by the trampling of their feet, a number of
Blackcocks were dancing like mad creatures, with their beautiful
plumage fluffed out and their wings half spread, to show what handsome
fellows they were. While they watched them one splendid old Cock came
waltzing slowly round, with his feathers all gleaming in the chill
sunshine, and all the time looking out of the corner of his eye at one
of the Hens. And as generally happens when people look one way and go
another, particularly if they chance to be waltzing, he ran full
against another Cock, who was just in front of him, and nearly knocked
him over. Whereupon he asked the other Cock very angrily, "Now then,
where be coming to?"

But the other answered quite as angrily: "If you come knacking agin me
again like that, you old dumphead, I'll spoil your plumes for 'ee, I
will."

Then the old bird shook out all his feathers in a towering passion,
and said: "_You_ spoil my plumes, you little, miser'ble,
dirty-jacketed roog! You spoil my plumes! If you dare to come anigh
me, I'll give 'ee such a dressing as you won't get over this side
midsummer. I'll teach 'ee to call me dumphead!"

But the other was quite as quarrelsome, and answered very rudely: "You
give me a dressing? I'd like to see 'ee try it. Git out of the way,
and don't come here telling of your dressings. I bean't afeard to call
'ee dumphead. Now then, dumphead, dumphead, dumphead!"

And with that they flew at each other, and pecked and scratched and
ruffled, and beat each other with their wings, till all the ground was
covered with their feathers. And all the time the Greyhens kept
whispering to each other, "He's down--no, he's up--no, he's down
again. He's too strong for mun. Dear, dear, but the old bird's
sarving mun bad!" And so he was, for after a hard fight the old Cock
came back breathless and crowed with triumph, screaming, "Now, then,
who's the better bird?"

And the Greyhens answered in chorus: "Why, you be, my dear. Ah! you'm
a rare bird, sure enough. Get your breath, my dear, for 'tis sweetly
pretty to see 'ee dance."

So the Deer left them dancing and fighting, and making their way over
the moor again to Dunkery, went down into Horner Wood. And they found
the wood quiet and peaceful as if no hound had ever been near it; and
above their heads the oak-buds were swelled and ripe almost to
bursting, while under their feet was a carpet of glossy green and
blue, picked out with stars of pale yellow, for the bluebells and
primroses had thrust their heads through the dead leaves to welcome
the spring. The gorse, too, was flaming with yellow blossom, the
thorns were gay in their new green leaves, and the bracken was
thrusting up its green coils, impatient to uncurl and make a shelter
for the deer.

They rarely saw an old stag, though they met a young one or two, and
they did not even see many hinds, though they frequently met and
talked to Ruddy. And the Calf now became better friends than ever with
Ruddy's daughter, for, having both of them seen a great deal of the
world after a life of one whole year, they had plenty to talk about.
One day she told him, as a great secret, that her mother had promised
her a little brother before many months should be past; but all that
he did was to make her promise that she would still like him best. And
the truth is that he began to think himself rather too fine a fellow
to be interested in calves when there were older male deer to
associate with. For as soon as the ash began to sprout, all the male
deer in Horner formed clubs to go and eat the young shoots, for there
is nothing that they love so much to eat; and he of course went among
them and nibbled away as greedily as any, though not being the biggest
deer he did not of course get the biggest share.

Besides, not long after the ash was in leaf, he began to feel rather a
pain in his head; and although a headache is not generally a pleasant
thing, yet this was so slight and at the same time so interesting,
that he did not much mind it. For on each side of the crown of his
head there appeared a little swelling, very hot and tender, which
grew into a little knob of black velvet, and which he thought very
handsome, though you and I perhaps might not think so. But he was so
proud of it that he always looked at it in the water, when he went
down to drink of an evening, to see how it was growing. And the best
of it was, that not one of the big stags now had much more on their
heads than he had, for they had lost their horns, and were looking
very foolish with their great necks and manes and nothing to carry on
them. He saw the big stags so very seldom now that he could hardly
find an opportunity of asking them what had happened; and when at last
he got a chance of putting the question to a huge old fellow, whom he
came upon one day with his mouth full of ivy, he was in such a hurry
that I am afraid he must have seemed inquisitive. For the old Stag
stared at him for a minute with the ivy sticking out of his lips, and
then said very gruffly, "Go away, and mind your own business. Little
calves should be seen and not heard." And our Deer was so much vexed
at being called a little Calf, whereas he was really a Pricket, that
he slunk away down to the water to have a look at his velvet; but it
was getting on so beautifully that he felt quite comforted, and was
glad that, although the Stag had been so unkind, he had not said,
"You're another," or something rude and disrespectful of that kind,
which would have been most unbecoming in a Red-Deer.

A few days later the matter was partly explained to him. For early one
morning when he was out at feed in a growing corn-field with a number
of young male deer, a four-year-old came galloping up the hedge trough
with a sheep-dog racing after him. The four-year-old was in such a
flurry that he jumped the fence at the corner of the field without
noticing an overhanging branch, and thump! down fell both of his horns
on one side of the hedge, while he galloped on, leaving them behind
him, on the other. The rest of the deer also went off in a hurry, you
may be sure, after such a scare, for they did not expect a sheep-dog
to be out so early; and, indeed, it is quite possible that the
sheep-dog had no business to be out. His mother looked very grave when
our Pricket told her about it; and that very night they set out across
the moor, pointing straight for the covert where they had hidden
themselves during the last summer.

And there they found all their old friends; for the Badger had dug
himself a new earth and was quite happy, and the Vixen had found his
old house so convenient that she had turned it into a nursery; and, as
they passed, three little Cubs poked their heads out of one of the
holes, and winked at them like so many little vulgar boys. But on the
very day after they arrived they heard loud yapping, as of a little
dog, about the earth, and crossing to the other side of the valley,
they could faintly hear men's voices and the constant clink of iron
against stones. And when night came and they ventured to come nearer,
they found the old Vixen running about like one distracted, crying for
her Cubs; for the earth was all harried and destroyed, and there could
be no doubt that the men had dug the Cubs out and taken them away. And
the wailings of the poor old Vixen were so distressing that they left
the wood and turned up again over the moor.

Soon they began to pass over strange ground, which rose higher and
higher before them. The little streams grew more plentiful, coming
down from every side in deep clefts which they had dug through the
turf to hasten their journey to the sea; the ground beneath their feet
became softer and softer, though it was never so ill-mannered as to
give way under their light step, and the water dripped incessantly
down from the ragged edges of the turf above the clefts. But they went
on higher and higher, till at last they stood on a dreary waste of
rough grass, and miry pools, and turf-pits blanched by the white
bog-flower. For they were on the great ridge whence the rivers of
Exmoor take their source and flow down on all sides to the sea; and a
wild treacherous tract it is. They passed a little bird no bigger than
a thrush, who had his beak buried so deep in the mire that he could
not speak; and the Hind said, "Good day, Master Snipe. Your wife and
family are well, I hope?" Then the little bird hastily plucked a long
bill out of the ground, though his mouth was so full of a big worm
that he was obliged to be silent for a minute or two; nevertheless at
last he gulped the worm down, washed his bill in a little pool of
water, and piped out, "Very well, thank you, my lady, half-grown or
more."

"You couldn't tell me what there is over the hill?" asked the Hind.

"Not very well, not to tell your ladyship what you want to know," said
the Snipe, "but you'll find the old Wild-duck a bit farther on and
she'll tell 'ee." And he began routling about in the mire again with
his beak.

So they lay down till evening among the turf-pits, and after
travelling a little way farther they reached the very top of the hill
and saw a new world. For before them the high land of the moor plunged
down into a tangle of smaller hills, cut up by great green banks into
innumerable little fields, and seamed and slashed by a hundred wooded
valleys. Fifty miles before them the land rose high again and swelled
up to the tors of Dartmoor, which stood stately and clear and blue
against the sky. But on their right hand the moor seemed to leap at
one bound many miles to the sea; and they saw the white line of the
surf breaking on Bideford Bar, and beyond it Lundy, firm and solid in
mid-sea, and far beyond Lundy the wicked rocky snout of Hartland
Point, purple and gaunt beneath the sinking sun.

The Hind looked anxiously at the wooded valleys beneath their feet,
wondering which she should take; but presently they heard a loud
"Quack, quack, quack," and down she went in the direction of the
sound. And there in a pool of a little stream they found an old Duck,
very prim and matronly, swimming about with her brood all round her,
and the Mallard with them. Whereupon of course the Hind stopped in
her civil way to ask after her and her little Flappers.

"Why, bless 'ee, my lady, they'm getting 'most too big to be called
Flappers," answered the Duck, "and I shall take mun out and down the
river to see the world very soon. They do tell me that some ducks
takes their broods straight to the big waters, but they must be
strange birds, and I don't hold wi' such. 'Twas my Mallard was
a-telling me. What was it you told me you saw down the river, my
dear?"

But the old Mallard was shy and silent; he only mumbled out something
that they could not hear, and swam away apart. Then the old Duck went
on in a whisper: "You see, my lady, he's just a-beginning to change
his coat, and very soon he'll be so dingy as I be for a whole month,
till his new coat cometh. Every year 'tis the same, and he can't abear
it, my lady, for it makes folk think that he's a Duck and no Mallard.
Not but that I think that a Duck's coat is beautiful, but a Mallard's
more beautiful yet, I can't deny that; but you know, my lady, how vain
these husbands be. But he did tell me about they ducks, and I say
again I don't hold wi' mun. I reared my brood in the turf-pits and
taught mun to swim, and bringed them down the little streams where
they couldn't come to no harm till they was big enough to take care of
theirselves. And I don't hold with no other way, for I'm not a-going
to have my little ducks drownded."

"And is the river quiet?" asked the Hind; "and could we live in the
valley?"

"The valley's so quiet as a turf-pit, my lady," said the old Duck,
"beautiful great woods for miles down. Surely I've heard tell that
your family lived there years agone."

So they took leave of the Ducks, and going down into the strange
valley found it as she had said. The woods ran down by the little
river for miles; and though the valley left the moor far behind it,
yet there were fields of grass, and corn, and turnips, full of good
food whenever they might want it; so they decided to make themselves
very comfortable there for the whole summer.




CHAPTER VII


One day when they were out at feed our Pricket caught sight of a
little brown bird with a full dozen of little chicks cheeping all
round her; and as he was always anxious to make new friends he trotted
up to scrape acquaintance with the stranger. But what was his
astonishment when the little bird fluffed out her wings and flew at
him.

"You dare to touch mun," she said furiously, "you dare to touch mun,
and I'll peck out the eyes of 'ee."

"But, my dear soul," he said, "I won't do you any harm."

"Oh, beg your pardon," said the little bird, "I didn't see who it was,
and I made sure that it was one of they sheep-dogs. But I don't mind
ever to have seen one of you here; I thought you belonged farther down
the valley."

"But I come from the moor," he said.

"I ha'n't never been on the moor," said the little bird, "but there's
more of 'ee down the valley, at least I think there be, for, begging
your honour's pardon, I don't rightly know who you be. Do 'ee want to
know the way? Then follow down the river till you'm clear of the woods
and then turn up over the fields, till you see another wood, and that
will bring 'ee to the place where your friends be. And I beg your
honour's pardon for mistaking your honour for a sheep-dog, for I've
never seen the like of you before, but they sheep-dogs do worry us
poor Partridges terrible."

And she bustled away with her Chicks. But the Pricket was so much
excited to hear of other Deer that he entreated his mother to go where
the Partridge had told them. And they went just as she had said, over
the fields and into the wood that she spoke of, but to their
disappointment saw no sign of a deer there. So they passed on through
the wood to the valley again, and then they came to a park with the
river running through it, and great trees bigger than he had ever
seen, beech and oak and lime and chestnut, some in rows and some in
clumps, a beautiful expanse of green, all dripping in the morning dew.
And there the Pricket saw deer, and he was so delighted that he ran
on by himself to speak to them; but he was puzzled, for some of them
were black, and some were white, and some were red, and the greater
part were spotted; while not one was near so big as he was, though
many of them had growing horns as big as his own and bigger. So he
made sure that they must all be calves with some new description of
horn, and going up to the biggest of them he said rather
patronisingly, "Good morning, my little friend."

But the other turned round and said, "Little friend! Do you know who I
am, sir? I am the Master-Buck of this park, sir, and I'll trouble you
not to call me your little friend."

"But why don't you come to the woods and on to the moor?" said the
Pricket, astonished. "I've never seen you there."

"Did you hear me say that I was the Master-Buck of this park, sir?"
said the Fallow-Buck, "and do you know what that means? I am lord of
the whole of this herd, and master of everything inside this
park-fence. What do I want with woods and moors, when I have all this
beautiful green park for a kingdom, and all this grass to feed on in
the summer, and hay, sir, hay brought to me in the winter? Do you get
hay brought to you in the winter, sir?"

"Why," broke in the Pricket, "do you mean to say that you can't feed
yourself?"

But here the Hind trotted up and fetched her son away. "They are only
miserable little tame Fallow-Deer," she said. "You should never have
lowered yourself to speak to them."

"No, mother," he answered; "but fancy preferring to live in a wretched
little park instead of wandering free through the woods and over the
moor! Do let me go back and thrash him."

But when the Fallow-Buck heard this he trotted away as quick as he
could; and mother and son went back into the wood. And as they entered
it a very handsome bird with a grey back and a rosy breast and bright
blue on his wings fluttered over their heads screeching at the top of
his voice. "Come in," he said, "please to come right in. But we Jays
be put here to scritch when any stranger cometh into the wood, and
scritch I must and scritch I shall." And certainly he did, in a most
unpleasant tone, for he had been watching a brood of another bird's
chicks instead of minding his proper business, and so had missed them
when they first came in. So he screeched double to make up for lost
time.

Then presently there came towards them another bird, walking very
daintily on the ground. He had a green neck and bright red round his
eyes, and a coat which shone like burnished copper mixed with
burnished gold. He stopped as they came up, and waiting till the
Pricket had wandered a little way from his mother, he went up to him
and said in a very patronising tone: "Welcome, young sir, welcome to
my wood. I have not the pleasure of knowing who you are, but my name I
expect is familiar to you. Phasianus Colchicus, ahem--" and he
strutted about with great importance. "You have heard of me, no
doubt."

"I am afraid not," said the Pricket very civilly. "You see, I come
from the moor. But I thought that I saw one or two birds like you as
we passed through this wood."

"Like me," said the bird suspiciously; "are you quite sure that they
were like me, like me in every way?"

"Well," said the Pricket hesitating, "they had pretty white rings
round their necks--?"

"What!" broke in the bird, "rings round their necks, and like me! Oh,
the ignorance of young people nowadays. My dear young friend, you have
a great deal to learn. Have I a white ring round my neck? No. Well,
now I must ask your pardon if I turn my back upon you for one moment."
And round he turned very slowly and ceremoniously and stood with his
back to the Pricket, who stared at it not knowing what to say.

"Well," said the bird, looking over his shoulder after a time. "You
make no remark. Is it possible that you notice nothing? My dear young
friend, let me ask you, do you see any green on my back?"

"No," said the Pricket, and honestly he did not.

"So," said the bird very tragically. "Look well at that back, for you
will never see such another again, my young friend. I am one of the
old English breed, the last of my race, the last of those that, coming
centuries ago from the banks of the Phasis, made England their home
and were, I may venture to say, her greatest ornament. But now a
miserable race of Chinese birds has come in, and go where I will I see
nothing but white-ringed necks and hideous green backs. My very
children, now no more, took them for wives and husbands, and I alone
am left of the old pure breed, the last of the true Pheasants, the
last king of this famous wood, the last and the greatest--bless me,
what's that? Kok, kok, kok, kok, kok." Thereupon he flipped up into a
larch-tree and began at the top of his voice: "You wretched creature,
how often have I forbidden you the woods? Go home and catch mice, go
home. My dear young friend, let me entreat you to drive that wretch
away."

And the Pricket looking round saw a little black and white Cat
slinking through the wood close by, a thing he had never seen before
and did not at all like the sight of. She took not the least notice of
the Pheasant till the Hind trotted down through the covert and said
very sternly: "Go home, Pussy, go home. How dare you come out into the
woods? Take care, or you'll come to a bad end." And the Cat ran away
as fast as she could; and I may as well say that she did come to a bad
end the very next week, for she was caught in a trap and knocked on
the head, which last is the fate of all poaching cats sooner or later.
So if ever you own a cat, be careful to keep it at home.

"Ah!" said the old Cock-Pheasant, much relieved, as the Cat
disappeared. "Is that your mother, my young friend? What an excellent
person! You must introduce me some day, but really at this moment I
feel quite unfit to leave this tree."

So they left him sitting in the larch tree, not looking at all kingly,
and wandered about the wood, finding it very much to their liking; for
there was dry ground and wet ground, sunny beds and shady beds, warm
places and cool places, and great quiet and repose. And that is why
all wild animals love Bremridge Wood and always have loved it.

Now some days after they had made their home there, the Pricket became
troubled with a good deal of itching in the velvet on his head. He
shook his head violently, but this did no good except to make the
velvet fall down in little strips, so at last he picked out a neat
little ash-tree and rubbed and scrubbed and frayed till all the velvet
fell to the ground, and he was left with a clean little pair of smooth
white horns. At this he was so pleased with himself that he must needs
go down to the river to look at himself in the water; and after that
he could not be satisfied till he had passed through the deer-park to
let the Fallow-Deer see him. But here he was a little abashed, for the
horns of the Bucks were many of them much bigger than his own, though
flat, like your hand, and, as he thought, not nearly so handsome.

The Hind now became restless and inclined to wander, so that they went
the round of all the woods in the neighbourhood; and thus it was that
one day they came upon ground covered with rhododendrons, and azaleas,
and tall pine-trees of a kind that they had never seen before. They
would hardly have ventured upon it if they had not heard the quacking
of wild-ducks, which led them on till they came upon a little stream.
They followed the water downward till they came to a waterfall, where
they stopped for a minute in alarm; for at its foot lay the remains of
three little ducks quite dead, little more indeed than heaps of wet
feathers, only to be recognised by their poor little olive-green
beaks. But they still heard quacking below, and going on they
presently found a dozen Mallards and Ducks exactly like those that
they had seen on the moor, all full-plumed and full-grown.

The Hind went up to them at once, but they took not the least notice
of her. She wished them good-morning, but still they took no notice;
so then she said in her gentlest voice: "I am afraid that you have
had a dreadful misfortune with your little Flappers."

Then at last a little Duck turned round and said very rudely: "Ey?
What yer s'yin'?"

"Your little Ducklings which I saw lying dead by the fall," she said.

"Well," said the Duck still more rudely, "let 'em lie there. I can't
be bothered with 'em. Who asked you to come poking your nose into our
water?"

The Hind was very angry, for she had never been spoken to like this,
and she remembered how very differently the Duck had talked to her on
the moor. So instead of leaving these disgraceful little Ducks alone,
which would perhaps have been wiser, she began to scold them. "What,"
she said, "do you mean to say that you let the poor little things
drown for want of proper care? I never heard of such a thing. You
ought to be ashamed of yourselves."

And then all the Ducks broke out in chorus. "'Ow, I s'y, 'ere's an old
party come to teach us 'ow to bring up our chicks," said one. "Shall I
just step out and teach your little feller 'ow to run?" said another.
"Look out, little 'un, or your 'orns will drop off," said a third; and
this annoyed the Pricket very much, for how could his horns be
dropping off, considering that they were only just clean of velvet?
"The old 'un hasn't got no 'orns," said a fourth; "there's an old Cow
in the next field. Shall I go and borrow a pair for you, mum? She'll
be 'appy to lend 'em, I'm sure." And they all burst out laughing
together, "Quar, quar, quar, quar!" And I am sorry to say that the
Ducks laughed even louder than the Mallards.

Altogether they were so rude, and impudent, and vulgar, and odious,
that the Deer walked away with great dignity without saying another
word. And as they went they saw an old grey Fox crouching down in the
rushes by the water-side, as still as a stone, and quite hidden from
view. Then the Hind turned to warn the Ducks, but she could hardly
utter a word before they all came swimming down, laughing, "Quar,
quar, quar," till she couldn't hear herself speak. Presently they
turned to the bank, still laughing, and waddled ashore one after
another; when all of a sudden up jumped the Fox, caught the foremost
Mallard by the neck, threw him over his back, and trotted away
laughing in his turn. And the rest of the ducks flew back to the water
fast enough then, you may be sure, and were sorry when it was too
late that they had been so rude. But the truth is, that these were not
true wild-ducks, but what are called tame wild-ducks, which had been
bought in Leadenhall Market. And this accounted for their bad manners,
their ugly language, and their conceit; for like a great many other
creatures that are bred in towns, they thought they knew everything,
whereas in reality they could not take care of their children nor even
of themselves.

The Hind was very much disgusted, and began to think that she had
wandered too far from the moor, as indeed she had. For on their way
back to Bremridge Wood they were chased by a sheep-dog, and when they
shook him off by jumping a hedge they found themselves in the middle
of a lot of bullocks, which ran together and galloped after them and
tried to mob them. So they decided to have no more to do with a
country where there were so many tame things, but to go straight back
to the moor. The Pricket thought that it might be pleasanter only to
move up to their old home in the woods higher up the valley, but the
Hind was impatient to return to the moor. There was no one to warn her
not to go, and they set out that very same night.




CHAPTER VIII


They were glad to get on to the heather again, and to hear the breeze
singing over the moor, and still more glad when they caught the wind
of deer and found Aunt Yeld and Ruddy among them. And Lady Ruddy had
kept her promise to her little Hind and had given her a little Stag
for a brother, a fine little fellow, who was already beginning to shed
his white spots and grow his brown coat. But almost directly after
they arrived the stags began belling and fighting again, and there was
no peace for nearly a month until they had tired themselves out and
settled down to live quietly for another year.

Then came a week of sharp frost, which made the ground too hard for
the hounds to trouble them; and they really began to think that they
might enjoy a quiet winter. Their winter-friends came flocking back to
them, the Woodcock arriving one bright moonlight night with the whole
of her own family and two or three more families besides. They all
settled down above the cliffs where the springs were kept unfrozen by
the sea, and night after night while the moon lasted the Pricket saw
them grubbing in the soft ground with their long bills, and growing
fatter and fatter. But at length one morning the Sea-gulls came in
screaming from the sea to say that the west wind and the rain were
coming; and that very night the frost vanished. Then came three days
of endless grey clouds and mizzling rain, and then the sun and blue
sky returned; and the Deer moved out of the covert to the open ground
to enjoy St. Martin's summer.

But one day while they were lying in the great grass tufts in the
middle of the wet ground, they were startled by the approach of horses
and hounds; and they leaped to their feet and made off in all haste.
There were but two hounds after them, but for all that the Hind and
the Pricket were never more alarmed, for scent as they knew was good,
and the pace at which those two hounds flew after them was terrible.
They had not run above a quarter of a mile when Aunt Yeld turned off
in one direction, and Ruddy with her Yearling and her Calf in
another; but the hounds let them go where they would, and raced after
our Pricket and his mother as if they had been tied to them. They both
ran their hardest, but they could not shake off those two hounds, and
presently they parted company and fled on, each of them alone. The
Pricket made for the cliffs, dashing across the peat-stream without
daring to wait for a bath; and as he cantered up the hill towards the
refuge that he had chosen, he caught sight of his mother racing over
the yellow grass at her topmost speed, and no longer one couple but
sixteen couples of hounds racing after her in compact order, not one
of them gaining an inch on his neighbour. He saw her gallop up to a
gate in a fence and fly over it like an arrow from the bow; and a few
minutes after her the hounds also came to the same gate and flew over
it likewise, without pausing for an instant, like a handful of white
blossoms driven before the wind. Then he turned into the plantation,
frightened out of his life, and ran down through them, leaping
desperately over the stunted trees and scaring the Woodcocks out of
their five wits. And from the plantation he ran down through the
oak-woods on the cliff, and from thence to the beach, and then without
pausing for a moment he ran straight into the sea and swam out over
the waves as only a deer can swim.

The cool water refreshed him; and presently he stopped swimming and
turned round, floating quietly on the surface, to see if he was still
in danger. But the woods were all silent, and there was no sign of
hound or horse on the shore or on the cliff-paths; so after waiting
for another quarter of an hour he swam back, and climbed up over the
cliff again till he found a stream of fresh water. There he drank a
good draught, and passing on came upon a Woodcock, one of those that
he had frightened on his way down. The little bird was rather cross at
having been disturbed in the middle of her day-dreams, for she said:
"What on earth made you come tearing through this wood in that mad way
just now? There was nobody hunting you, and nothing of any kind to
frighten you. I was in the middle of a delightful dream about Norway,
and you quite spoilt it." But he soon soothed her, for woodcocks are
easy-going little creatures, and went away and lay down, very much
relieved to know that he was unpursued.

When evening came he went away to seek his mother, but he could not
find her; and all next day he wandered about asking every deer that
he met if they had seen her, but not one could tell him anything. He
met Aunt Yeld and Ruddy, but they knew nothing, and he could not ask
the hounds who might have told him; so at last very sorrowfully he
gave up searching and made up his mind that she would never come back.
And he was right, for she never did come back, and he never saw her
again. But, after all, he was old enough to take care of himself, and
it was time for him to be making his own way in the world. There were
plenty of young deer of his own age to keep him company, and Aunt Yeld
and Ruddy's little daughter were still left for old friends. So he
settled down comfortably on Dunkery, and by good luck was little
troubled the rest of the winter by the hounds.

At last the spring came again and all was peace on the moor. The ash
sent forth its green shoots, and as usual all the young male deer came
crowding up to eat them; and our Deer got a larger share this spring,
for he was bigger and stronger and could drive the yearlings away. But
about the middle of April his head began to ache again, and not only
to ache but to irritate him a great deal. It grew worse and worse
every day, and one morning it got so troublesome on one side that he
gave his head an extra violent shake; and lo and behold! the horn on
that side began to totter, and before he could understand what had
happened, it fell to the ground. For a minute or two he stood still
trembling with pain, for the air struck cold on to the place from
which the horn had dropped, and hurt him dreadfully. The pain soon got
better, and he went away to hide himself, for he felt very much
ashamed at having but one horn. But after a few hours the other side
of his head grew as bad as the first, and he was wondering what on
earth he should do, when who should come by but another Two-year-old,
with both horns still on his head? Now this Two-year-old was rather
smaller than our Deer, and rather disliked him because he took a
larger share of the ash-sprouts; so thinking that this would be a fine
opportunity of taking his revenge, he came at him at once with his
head lowered. And our Deer ran away--what else could he do with only
one horn against two?--and as he bounded under the oak bushes he
knocked his remaining horn against a branch, and thump! off it came as
suddenly as the other. But he was able to crow over the Two-year-old
in a few days when he too had shed his horns, for our Deer had got
the start of him in growing a new pair, and could show two inches of
growing velvet where the other could only show one.

So when the autumn came and the velvet began to peel, our Deer found
that he had bigger horns than any other deer of his own age, brow,
trey and upright, very strong and well-grown; such was his good luck
in being an early calf and having had so good a mother. And when
another year came (for the years, as you will find out to your cost
some day, fly away much faster as one grows older) and he had shed his
old horns and grown his new pair, he carried on each horn, brow, bay
and trey, with two on top on one side and upright on the other, or
nine points in all.

Now towards the end of that summer a great big Stag came up to him and
said, "My fine young fellow, it is time that you had nothing more to
do with hinds and young things; you must come and be my squire." Now
our Deer thought it a great compliment to be noticed by so splendid an
old fellow, and went with him gladly enough. The pair of them were
constantly together for several weeks; and our Deer found it not
unpleasant, for the old Stag knew of all the best feeding grounds,
and, though he took all the best of the food for himself, left plenty
and to spare for the squire. But it was a shame to see how wasteful
this greedy old fellow was. For if they went into a turnip-field he
would only take a single bite out of a turnip, worry it out of the
ground, and go on to another; while often he would pick up scores of
roots and throw them over his head, from mere mischief and pride in
the strength of his neck. Again, in the corn-fields he was so dainty
that he would not take a whole ear of corn, but would bite off half of
it and leave the rest to spoil. Now a hind, as our Deer knew from
observing his mother, is far more thrifty. She will take four or five
bites out of a turnip before she pulls it out of the ground and leaves
it, and she takes the whole of an ear of corn instead of half. But I
am sorry to say that our young Deer took example from the great Stag,
and soon became as wasteful and mischievous as he was in his feeding;
and indeed I never saw nor heard of a stag that had not learned this
very bad habit.

The only occasions on which the old Stag did not keep his squire with
him was when he went to lie down in the covert for the day after
feeding. The lazy old fellow was very particular about his bed, and
was aware of all kinds of quiet places in the cliffs, where he knew
that the hounds would be unlikely to find him. Or sometimes he would
tell his squire to stop for a minute, and then he would make a
gigantic bound of twenty feet or more into the midst of some dense
thicket, and say to him quietly: "Now I am quite comfortable. Do you
go on and lie down by yourself; but don't go too far, and keep to
windward of me, so that I can find you if I want you."

And our Deer used to go as he was told, never doubting that all was
right; nor was it until late in the autumn that he found out his
mistake. For one day while he was lying quietly in the short
plantation above the cliffs he heard the familiar cry of hounds, and
presently up came the old Stag. He jerked his head at him, just as the
other old stag had done when he was a calf, and said very roughly:
"Now, then, give me your bed, young fellow, and run instead of me.
Look sharp." And our Deer jumped up at once, but he was so angry and
astonished at being treated in this way now that he was grown up, that
he quite forgot his manners, and said very shortly, "Sha'n't!"

"How dare you? Go on at once," said the old Stag, quivering with rage
and lowering his head, but our Deer lowered his head too and made
ready to fight him, though he was but half of his size; and it would
have gone hard with him, if just at that moment the hounds had not
come up. Then the old Stag threw himself down into his bed with a
wicked chuckle; and the hounds made a rush at our Deer and forced him
to fly for his life. So there he was, starting alone before the hounds
for the first time, and with only a few minutes to make up his mind
whither he would go. But what other refuge should he seek but the wood
where his mother had led him as a calf? So he left the covert at once
and started off gallantly over the heather.

He ran on for five or six miles, for he had been frightened by finding
the hounds so close to him when the old Stag drove him out. But after
a time he stopped and listened, for he had heard no voice of hounds
behind him since he left the covert, and began to doubt whether they
were chasing him after all. He pricked his ears intently, and turned
round to find if the wind would bear him any scent of his enemies. No!
there was not a sign of them. Evidently they were not following him,
and he was safe. And this indeed was the case, for, though he did not
know it, some men had seen the two deer turn and fight, and, marking
the spot where the old Stag had lain down, had brought the hounds back
and roused him again. But our Deer was too wary to make sure of his
safety without the help of a peat-stream, so he cantered on to the
next water and ran up it for a long way till it parted into three or
four tiny threads, for he was now on the treacherous, boggy ground
where the rivers rise. Then he left the stream and lay down in the
tall, rank grass, meaning to wait there till night should come, if he
were undisturbed. And lonely though it was, he felt that he was on
friendly ground, for all round him the tiny brown streams were singing
their song.

    _Through heather and woodland, through meadow and lea_
    _We flow from the forest[1] away to the sea._
    _In cloud and in vapour, in mist and in rain_
    _We fly from the sea to the forest again._
    _Oh! dear is the alder and dearer the fern,_
    _And welcome are kingfisher, ousel and herne,_
    _The swan from the tide-way, the duck from the mere,_
    _But welcome of all is the wild Red-Deer._
    _Turn down to the sea, turn up to the hill,_
    _Turn north, turn south, we are with you still._
    _Though fierce the pursuer, wherever you fly_
    _Our voices will tell where a friend is nigh,_
    _Your thirst to quench, and your strength to stay,_
    _And to wash the scent of your feet away._
    _Lie down in our midst and know no fear,_
    _For we are the friends of the wild Red-deer._

   [Footnote 1: A forest does not necessarily imply trees. There is
   not a tree on the forest of Exmoor.]

So there he lay for two hours and more, never doubting but that he was
safe, till suddenly to his dismay he thought he heard the voice of a
hound, very faint and far away. He lay quite still, and after a time
he thought he heard it again; but he could hardly think that the
hounds could follow his line after so long a time. He waited and
waited, distinctly hearing the sound come nearer, though very slowly,
till presently a Blackcock came spinning up to him, whom he recognised
as one of the old Greyhen's children. "Beware, my lord, beware," he
said; "they'm coming slowly, but they'm a-coming, and I am bound to
warn 'ee."

"Are they come to the water?" he asked.

"No," said the Blackcock, "but they'm almost come to it. Bide quiet,
and I will keep watch. The old Stag managed to beat the hounds on the
cliffs, and as they could not find mun again, the men after waiting a
long time laid the pack on your line, and faint though scent was, they
have followed it slowly, and follow it yet."

So the Blackcock watched, and saw the hounds puzzling out the scent
inch by inch with the greatest difficulty. There were but very few
horsemen with them, though the moor was dotted in all directions with
a hundred or more of them that had given up the chase and were going
away. But a few still stuck to the hounds, which never ceased
searching in all directions for the line of the Deer. At last after
much puzzling the hounds carried the scent to the water, and there
they were brought to their wits' end; but they tried up and up and up
with tireless diligence till they came to a place where a huge tuft of
grass jutted out high over the water from the bank, and there they
stopped.

"Oh, my lord, my lord," whispered the Blackcock, "you didn't never
brush the grass as you passed, surely?"

But while he spoke a hound reared up on his hind-legs and thrust his
nose into the grass tuft, and said, "Ough! he has passed here;" and
the Deer knew the voice as that of the black and tan hound that had
led the way to his hiding-place once before when he was a calf. Yet he
lay still, though trembling, while the hounds searched on closer and
closer to him, albeit with little to guide them, for the scent was
weak from the water that had run off his coat when he left the stream.
At last, one after another, they gave up trying, and only the black
and tan hound kept creeping on with his nose on the ground, till at
last he caught the wind of the Deer in his bed, and stood rigid and
stiff with ears erect and nostrils spread wide. Then the Blackcock
rose and flew away crying, "Fly, my lord, fly," and the Deer jumped up
and bounded off at the top of his speed.

He heard every hound yell with triumph behind him, but he summoned all
his courage, and set his face to go over the hill to the valley
whither the Wild-Duck had guided him two years before. And he gained
on the hounds, for he was fresh, whereas they had worked hard and
travelled far to hunt him to his bed. So he cantered on in strength
and confidence over bog and turf-pit till he gained the hilltop, and
on down the long slope which led to the valley, and through the
oak-coppice to the water. Then he jumped in and ran down, while the
merry brown stream danced round him and leaped over his heated
flanks, refreshing him and encouraging him till he felt that he could
run on for ever.

He followed it for full two miles and would have followed it still
further, when all of a sudden a great Fish like a huge bar of silver
came sculling up the stream to him and motioned him back.

"What is it, my Lord Salmon?" he asked.

"There are men on the bank not far below the bridge," answered the
Fish. "Turn back, for your life. Do you know of a good pool within
reach upward?"

"Not one," said the Stag; "but hide yourself if you can, my Lord
Salmon, for the hounds will be down presently."

But for all the Salmon's warnings he went on yet a little further, for
he knew that he should find another stream flowing into that wherein
he stood, before he reached the bridge. So down he went till he
reached it, and then without leaving the water he turned up this
second stream for another mile. Then at last he went up into the
covert, turning and twisting as he had seen old Aunt Yeld on the moor,
and picking out every bit of stony ground, just as his mother had
taught him.

Meanwhile he heard the hounds trying down the other stream far beyond
the spot where he had left it; and when at last they tried back up the
water after him the evening was closing in, and the scent was so weak
and all of them so tired that they could only hunt very slowly. So he,
like a cunning fellow, kept passing backward and forward through the
wood from one stream to the other, till at last he began to grow tired
himself; when luckily he met the Salmon again, who led him down to a
deep pool, where he sunk himself under the bank, as he had once seen
Aunt Yeld sink herself. He lay there till night came and the valley
was quiet and safe, and then he jumped out and lay down, very thankful
to the friendly waters that had saved his life.




CHAPTER IX


Our Deer was so much pleased with himself after his escape that he
began to look upon himself as quite grown up, and hastened back to the
moor as soon as October came to find himself a wife. I needn't tell
you that it was his old play-fellow, Ruddy's daughter, who had been
born in the same year as himself, that he was thinking of; and he soon
found that she wished for nothing better. But most unluckily the old
Stag, whose squire he had been, had also fallen in love with her, and
was determined to take her for himself. He would run after her all
day, belling proposals at the top of his voice; and his lungs were so
much more powerful than our Deer's that, do what he would, our friend
could not get a word in edgeways. At last the Hind was so much bored
by the noise and the worry that she made up her mind to steal away
with our Deer quietly one night, and run off with him under cover of
the darkness; which was what he had long been pressing her to do
whenever he could find a chance.

So off they started together for the quiet valley to which the
Wild-Duck had shown him the way when he was still a yearling with his
mother; for there he knew that they would be undisturbed and alone,
which is a thing that newly-married couples particularly enjoy. And I
may tell you that if ever you hear of a stag and hind that have
strayed far away from their fellows to distant coverts, you may be
quite sure that they are just such another young couple as this of our
story.

Of course he took her everywhere and showed her everything in the
valley, explaining to her exactly how he had baffled the hounds there
a few weeks before. And he tried hard to find the Salmon who had
helped him so kindly, but he could not light upon him anywhere, nor
find any one who knew where he was gone. The Wild-Ducks were gone to
other feeding-grounds, and the only people whom he could think of who
might have known were a pair of Herons that roosted in the valley; but
they were so dreadfully shy that he never could get within speaking
distance of them. Once he watched one of them standing on the
river-bank as still as a post for a whole hour together, till all of
a sudden his long beak shot down into the water, picked up a little
wriggling trout, and stowed it away in two seconds. Then our Stag (for
so we must call him now) making sure that he would be affable after
meals, as people generally are, trotted down at once to talk to him.
But the Heron was so much startled that he actually dropped the trout
from his beak, mumbled out that he was in a dreadful hurry, and flew
away.

But, after they had lived in the valley a month or more, there came a
bitter hard frost, and to their joy the Wild-Ducks came back to the
river saying that their favourite feeding-ground was frozen up. The
best chance of finding the Salmon, they said, was to follow the water
upward as far as they could go. So up the two Deer went till the
stream became so small that they could not imagine how so big a fish
could keep afloat in it, but at last catching sight of what seemed to
be two long black bars in the water they went closer to see what these
might be. And there sure enough was the Salmon with another Fish
beside him, but he was as different from his former self as a stag in
October is from a stag in August. The bright silver coat was gone and
had given place to a suit of dirty rusty red; his sides, so deep and
full in the summer, were narrow and shrunken; and indeed the biggest
part of him was his head, which ended in a great curved beak, not
light and fine as they had seen it before, but heavy and clumsy and
coarse. He seemed to be in low spirits and half ashamed of himself,
but he was as courteous as ever. "Allow me to present you to my wife,"
he said, "though I am afraid that she is hardly fit to entertain
visitors just at present."

Then the other Fish made a gentle, graceful movement with her tail,
but she looked very ill and weak, and though she had no great beak
like her mate she seemed, like him, to be all head and no body.

"But, my Lord Salmon," said the Stag, "what has driven you so far up
the water?"

"Well, you see," said the Salmon in a low voice, "that my wife is very
particular about her nursery; nothing but the finest gravel will suit
her to lay her eggs on. So we came up and up, and I am bound to say
that we have found a charming gravel-bed, and that the eggs are doing
as well as possible; but unfortunately the water has fallen low with
this frost, and we cannot get down again till the rain comes. Only
yesterday a man came by and tried to spear me and my wife with a
pitchfork, but luckily he slipped on the frozen ground and fell into
the water himself, so that we escaped. But she was very much
frightened, and till the frost breaks we shall still be in danger. Do
not stay here, for it is not safe; and besides I am ashamed to see
visitors when we are in such a state."

"But what about the eggs, my Lord Salmon?" said the Stag.

"The stream will take care of them; and if a few are lost, what is
that among ten thousand?" said the Salmon proudly. "But let me beg you
not to wait."

So the Deer went down the valley again, hoping that the West wind
might soon come and drive away the frost, for the Salmon's sake as
well as for their own. And a few days later they were surprised to
meet the old Cock-Pheasant from Bremridge Wood, who came running
towards them, very gorgeous in his very best winter plumage, but
rather nervous and flurried.

"Why, Sir Phasianus," said the Stag, "what brings you so far from
home?"

"Well, the fact is," said the Pheasant, "that I did not quite like the
look of things this morning. Some men came round early while I was
feeding in my favourite stubble, and began beating the hedges to drive
me and all my companions back into my wood. Most of those foolish
Chinese birds flew back as the men wanted them, but I have not lived
all these years for nothing, so I flew up the valley and have been
running on ever since. Hark! I thought that I was right."

And as he spoke two faint reports came echoing up the valley; "pop!
pop!" and then a pause and again "pop! pop!" a sound which was strange
to the Deer.

"That's the men with their guns," said the cunning old Bird, "they are
beating my wood, and that's why I am here. To-morrow they will be
there again, but the next day I shall return, and I hope to have the
pleasure of receiving you there very shortly after." And he ran up
into the covert and hid himself under a bramble bush on a heap of dead
leaves, so that you could hardly tell his neck from the live leaves or
his body from the dead.

The Deer would not have thought of accepting his invitation, for they
were very comfortable where they were, but that a few evenings later
the air grew warmer and the South-West wind began to scream through
the bare branches over their heads. Then the rain came down and the
wind blew harder and harder in furious gusts, till far away from them
at the head of the covert they just heard the sound of a crash; and
not long after a score of terrified bullocks came plunging into the
covert. For a beech-tree on the covert fence had come down, smashing
the linhay in which the bullocks were lying, and tearing a great gap
in the fence itself; which had not only scared them out of their
senses but had driven them to seek shelter in the wood. And the Deer
got up at once and moved away; for they do not like bullocks for
companions, and guessed that, when the day came, there would be men
and dogs wandering all over the covert to drive the bullocks back.

So they went down the valley and into Bremridge Wood. The old
Cock-Pheasant was fast asleep high up on a larch-tree when they came,
but when the day broke he came fluttering down in spite of the rain,
and begged them to make themselves at home. For the pompous old Bird
was so full of his own importance that he still considered himself to
be master of the whole wood and the Deer to be merely his guests. Of
course they humoured him, though their ancestors had been lords of
Bremridge Wood long before his; so the Stag complimented him on the
beauty of his back, and the Hind told him that she had never seen so
lovely a neck as his in her life. But still he seemed to want more
compliments, though they could not think what more to say, until one
day he turned the subject to dew-claws; and then he asked the Hind why
her dew-claws were so much sharper than the Stag's and why they
pointed straight downward, while the Stag's pointed outwards, right
and left. Now these were personal questions that he had no business to
put, and indeed would not have put if he had been _quite_ a gentleman.
But before the Hind could answer (for she had to think how she should
snub him without hurting his feelings _too_ much) he went on:

"And by the way, talking of dew-claws I don't think I have ever showed
you my spurs." And round he turned to display them. "You will agree
with me, I think," he continued, "that they are a particularly fine
pair, in fact I may say the finest that you are ever likely to see."

And certainly they were very big for a pheasant, more than half an
inch long, curved upward and sharp as a thorn. "I find them very
useful," he added, "to keep my subjects of this wood in order. When
the Chinese Cocks first invaded my kingdom they were inclined to be
rebellious against my authority, but now I am happy to say that they
know better." And he strutted about looking very important indeed.

Now about a week after this there was a full moon, and there came
flying into the wood a number of Woodcocks. The Deer thought nothing
of it, for they had often seen as many, and were always delighted to
watch the little brown birds digging in the soft ground and washing
their beaks in the water. But on the second morning after their
arrival a Jay came flying over their heads, screeching at the top of
his voice that there were strangers in the covert, and presently the
old Cock-Pheasant came running up in a terrible fluster, not at all
like the king of a wood.

"It's too bad," he said, "too bad. They have been here twice already,
and they have no business to come again." And as he spoke there came
the sound which they had once heard before, the pop! pop! of a
double-barrelled gun, but this time much nearer to them, and much more
alarming. The Stag jumped to his feet at once and called to the Hind
to come away.

"But you can't get away," said the old Pheasant, half angry, but
almost ready to cry. "I have already tried to run out in half a dozen
places, but wherever I went I met an odious imp of a Boy tapping two
sticks together; and really a Boy tapping two sticks together is more
than I can face. How I hate little Boys! But I won't stand it. I'll
run back through the middle of them, and then I declare that I'll
never enter this wood again. It's really past all bearing."

And he turned and ran back, but soon came forward again. "It's no
use," he said, "I shall run up over the hill and take my chance. But I
vow that I'll never enter this wood again. It's high time that they
should know that I won't stand it."

So off he ran again, but the Deer waited and listened; and they could
hear behind them a steady tapping of sticks along the whole hill-side,
which came slowly closer and closer to them. And every creature in the
wood came stealing forward round them, Rabbits and Cock-Pheasants and
Hens and Blackbirds and Thrushes, and a score of other Birds, dodging
this way and that, backward and forward, and listening with all their
ears. The Deer went forward a little way, but presently a
Cock-Pheasant came sailing high in the air over their heads. They
watched him flying on, vigorous and strong, till all of a sudden his
head dropped down, and his wings closed; and as he fell with a crash
to the ground they heard the report of a gun ring out sharp and angry
before them. Then they hesitated to go further, but other shots kept
popping by ones and twos behind them, till at last they turned up the
hill as the Cock-Pheasant had turned, and began to climb steadily
through the oak-coppice.

As they drew near the top of the hill they heard more tapping just
above them, and going on a little further found the old Cock-Pheasant
crouching down just below a broad green path. And on the path above
him stood a little rosy-cheeked Boy in a ragged cap, with a coat far
too big for him and a great comforter which hung down to his toes,
beating two sticks together and grinning with delight. The Deer
thought the Pheasant a great coward not to run boldly past so small a
creature, but, as they waited, there came two more figures along the
path and stood close to the Boy; and the Stag remembered them both,
for they were the fair man and the pretty girl whom he had seen when
he was a calf. The man looked a little older, for there was now a
little fair hair, which was most carefully tended, on his upper lip,
and he held himself very erect, with his shoulders well back and his
chest thrown out. There he stood, tall and motionless, with his gun on
his shoulder, watching for every movement and listening for every
rustle, so still and silent that the Deer almost wondered whether he
were alive. The girl stood behind him, as silent as he; and the Stag
noticed as a curious thing, which he had never observed in them
before, that both wore a scarf of green and black round their necks.
But her face too had changed, for it was no longer that of a girl but
of a beautiful woman, though just now it was sad and troubled. Her
eyes never left the figure of the man before her except when now and
again they filled with tears; and then she hastily brushed the tears
away with something white that she held in her hand, and looked at him
again.

But all the time the tapping behind them came closer and closer, and
the shots rang louder and louder, till at last the Deer could stand it
no longer, and dashed across the path and up over the hill. As they
passed they heard the man utter a loud halloo, and in an instant the
old Cock-Pheasant was on the wing and flying over the trees to cross
the valley. He rose higher and higher in the air, and presently from
the valley below came the report of two shots, then again of two
shots, and once more of two shots; and they heard the fair man laugh
loud after each shot. But the old Bird took not the slightest notice,
but flew on in the sight of the Deer till he reached the top of the
opposite hill, where he lighted on the ground, and ran away as fast as
his legs could carry him.

Then the Deer too crossed the valley further down, and stood in the
covert watching. And they saw a line of men in white smocks beat
through the covert to the very end, while the fair man and the girl
waited for them in the field outside. But presently another man came
riding up on a pony, and then all the men with guns came closing round
the fair man and seemed unwilling to let him go. But after a short
time he jumped on to the pony and trotted back along the path waving
his hand to them, while they waved their hands to him. Presently he
stopped to look back and wave his hand once more, and the girl waved
her white handkerchief to him, and then he set the pony into a gallop
and disappeared. But the other men went on, and the girl turned back
by herself very slowly and sadly. Then the shots began to ring out
again in the valley, and the Deer went away over the hill to the wood
whence the bullocks had driven them, and finding all quiet made their
home therein once more.




CHAPTER X


They had not been there many days when the old Cock-Pheasant came up
to them and invited them back to Bremridge Wood.

"I can assure you," he said very pompously, "that you shall not be
disturbed again for at least a year."

"Why, Sir Phasianus," said the Stag, "I thought you had vowed never to
enter it again."

"In a moment of haste I believe that I may have done so," said the old
bird; "but I have thought it over, and I cannot conceive how my wood
can get on without me. How should all those foolish, timid birds look
after themselves without me, their king, to direct them? No! there I
was hatched, and there I must stay till I end my days. And I shall
feel proud if you will join me, and stay with me, and honour my wood
with your presence on--ahem!--an interesting occasion."

"Indeed?" said the Stag.

"Yes," said the old Pheasant; "I had the misfortune to lose my wife
when the wood was shot some weeks ago. She had not the courage to come
here with me,"--(this, I am sorry to say, was not quite true, for he
had run away alone to take care of himself without thinking of going
to fetch her)--"and I am contemplating a new alliance--not directly,
you understand--but in a couple of months I hope to have the pleasure
of presenting you to my bride."

The Stag was much tempted to ask how he could marry a Chinese; and the
Hind hesitated for a moment, for, as you will find out some day, every
mother is deeply interested in a wedding. But she and the Stag did not
like to be disturbed, and they could not trust the Cock-Pheasant's
assurance after all that had happened; besides, she had arrangements
of her own to make for the spring. So they congratulated him and bade
him good-bye; nor did they ever see him again. And if you ask me what
became of him, I think that he must have died in a good old age,
unless, indeed, he was that very big bird with the very long spurs
that was shot by Uncle Archie last year. For he was such a bird as we
never see nowadays, and, as he said himself, the last of his race.

So the winter wore away peacefully in the valley, and the spring came
again. The Stag shed his horns earlier than in the previous year, and
began to grow a finer pair than any that he had yet worn. And a little
later the Hind brought him a little Calf, so that there were now three
of them in the valley, and a very happy family they were. So there
they stayed till quite late in the summer, and indeed they might never
have moved, if they had not met the Salmon again one day when they
went down to the river. He was swimming upward slowly and gracefully,
his silver coat brighter than ever, and his whole form broader and
deeper and handsomer in every way. He jumped clean out of the water
when he saw them, and the Stag welcomed him back and asked him where
he had been.

"Been?" said the Salmon, "why, down to the sea. We went down with the
first flood after you left us, and merry it was in the glorious salt
water. We met fish from half a dozen other rivers; and the little
fellows that you saw in their silver jackets asked to be remembered to
you, though you would hardly know them now, for they are grown into
big Salmon. But we were obliged to part at last and go back to our
rivers, and hard work it was climbing some of the weirs down below, I
can tell you; indeed, my wife could not get over one of them, and I
was obliged to leave her behind. Ah, there's no place like the sea! Is
there, my little fellow?" he said, looking kindly at the little Calf.

But the Hind was obliged to confess, with some shame, that her Calf
had never seen the sea.

"What! an Exmoor Deer, and never seen the sea?" exclaimed the Salmon;
and though he said no more, both Stag and Hind bethought them that it
was high time for their Calf to see not only the sea, but the moor. So
they bade the Salmon good-bye, and soon after moved out of the valley
to the forest, and over the forest to the heather. And the Stag could
not resist the temptation of going to look for old Bunny, so away they
went to her bury. But when he got there, though he saw other Rabbits,
he could perceive no sign of her; nor was it till he had asked a great
many questions that one of the Rabbits said:

"Oh! you'm speaking of great-grandmother, my lord. She's in to bury,
but she's got terrible old and tejious." And she popped into a hole,
from which after a while old Bunny came out. Her coat was rusty, her
teeth were very brown, and her eyes dim with age; and at first she
hardly seemed to recognise the Stag; but she had not quite lost her
tongue, for after a time she put her head on one side and began.

"Good-day, my lord; surely it was you that my Lady Tawny brought to
see me years agone, when you was but a little tacker. 'Tis few that
comes to see old Bunny now. Ah! she was a sweet lady, my Lady Tawny,
but her's gone. And Lady Ruddy was nighly so sweet, but her's gone.
And the old Greyhen to Badgworthy, she was a good neighbour, but her's
gone; and her poults be gone, leastways they don't never bring no
poults to see me. And my last mate, he was caught in a net. I said to
mun, 'Nets isn't nothing;' I says, 'When you find nets over a bury,
bite a hole in mun and run through mun, as I've a-done many times.'
But he was the half of a fule, as they all be; and he's gone. And
there's my childer and childer's childer, many of them's gone, and
those that be here won't hearken to my telling. And--"

But here the other Rabbit cut in. "Let her ladyship spake to 'ee,
grandmother. Please not to mind her, my lady, for she's mortal
tejious."

But old Bunny went on. "Is it my Lady Tawny or my Lady Ruddy? I'm sure
I can't tell. I'm old, my lady, and they won't let me spake. But I
wish you good luck with your little son. Ah! the beautiful calves that
I've seen, and the beautiful poults, and my own beautiful childer. But
there's hounds, and there's hawks, and there's weasels and there's
foxes; and there's few lasts so long as the old Bunny, and 'tis 'most
time for her to go." Then she crept back slowly into the hole, and
they saw her no more.

So they went on and found other deer; but Ruddy was gone, as old Bunny
had said, and Aunt Yeld alone remained of the Stag's old friends. She
too was now very old and grey, and her slots were worn down, and her
teeth and tushes blunted with age. But the Hind and Calf were
delighted to meet with deer again, and they soon made friends and were
happy. But as the autumn passed away and winter began to draw on, the
Stag grew anxious to return to the valley again, and would have had
the Hind come too; but she begged so hard to be allowed to stay on the
moor, that he could not say her no. She always lay together with other
Hinds, and they gossiped so much about their calves that the Stag took
to the company of other stags on Dunkery; but he always had a craving
to get back to the valley for the winter, and after a few weeks he
went back there by himself.

And lucky it was for him, as it chanced, for in January there came a
great storm of snow, which for three weeks covered the moor, blotting
out every fence and every little hollow in an unbroken, trackless
waste of white. The deer on the forest were hard put to it for food,
and even our Stag in the valley was obliged to go far afield. But he
soon found out the hay-mows where the fodder was cut for the bullocks,
and helped himself freely; nor was he ashamed now and then to take
some of the turnips that had been laid out for the sheep, when he
could find them. So he passed well through the hard weather, and when
the snow melted and the streams came pouring down in heavy flood, he
saw the old Salmon come sailing down in his dirty red suit, and
thought that, though both of them had been through hard times, he had
got through them the better of the two.

Then the spring came and he began to grow sleek and fat; and, when he
shed his horns, the new ones began once more to grow far larger than
ever before. So he settled down for a luxurious summer, and took the
best of everything in the fields all round the coverts. And when the
late summer came he found that he needed a big tree to help him to rub
the velvet from his horns, so he chose a fine young oak and went round
it so often, rubbing and fraying and polishing, that he fairly cut the
bark off from all round the trunk and left the tree to die.

One morning, soon after he had cleaned his head, he went out to feed
in the fields as usual, and had just made his lair in the covert for
the day, when he was aware of a man, who came along one of the paths
with his eyes on the ground. The Stag waited till he was gone, and
then quietly rose and left the valley for the open moor. For he had a
shrewd suspicion that all was not right when a man came round looking
for his slot in the early morning; and he was wise, for a few hours
later the men and hounds came and searched for him everywhere. And he
heard them from his resting place trying the valley high and low, and
chuckled to himself when he thought how foolish the man was who
thought to harbour him in such a fashion.

But after this he left the valley for good, and went back to the
coverts that overhung the sea, where he hid himself so cunningly day
after day that he was never found during the whole of that season.
And when October came and the deer began to herd together, he looked
about for his wife, but he could not find her anywhere, and he had sad
misgivings that the hounds might have driven her away, or worse, while
he was away in the valley. His only comfort was the reflection that if
he wished to marry again, and he and another stag should fancy the
same bride, he could fight for her instead of stealing her away. All
that winter he lay on Dunkery with other stags, as big as himself and
bigger, for he was now a fine Deer, and began to take his place with
the lords of the herd. And he grew cunning too, for he soon found out
that hinds and not stags are hunted in the winter-time, and he did not
distress himself by running hard when there was no occasion for it. He
would hear the hounds chasing in the woods quite close to him and
never move.

One winter's day when he was lying in a patch of gorse with three
others, he heard the hounds come running so directly towards him that
in spite of himself he raised his head to listen. And immediately
after, old Aunt Yeld came up in the greatest distress, and lay down
close to them. An old stag next to her was just rising to drive her
off, when a hound spoke so close to them that they all dropped their
chins to the ground and lay like stones. And poor Aunt Yeld whispered
piteously, "Oh! get up and run; I am so tired; do help me." But not a
stag would move, and our Stag, I am sorry to say, lay as still as the
rest. Then the hounds came within five yards of them, but still they
lay fast, till poor Aunt Yeld jumped up in despair and ran off. "May
you never know the day," she said, "when you shall ask for help and
find none! But the brown peat-stream, I know, will be my friend." And
she flung down the hill to the water in desperation, with the hounds
hard after her; and they never saw her again.

So the Stag lived on in the woods above the cliffs and on the forest
for two years longer. Each year found his head heavier and bearing
more points, his back broader, his body heavier and sleeker, and his
slots greater and rounder and blunter. He knew of all the best
feeding-grounds, so he was always well nourished, and he had learned
of so many secure hiding-places in the cliff from the old stag whom he
had served as squire, that he was rarely disturbed. More than once he
was roused by the hounds in spite of all that he could do, but he
would turn out every deer in the covert sooner than run himself; and
when, notwithstanding all his tricks, he was one day forced into the
open, he ran cunningly up and down the water as his mother had showed
him, and so got a good start of the hounds. Then he cantered on till
he caught the wind of a lot of hinds and calves and dashed straight
into the middle of them, frightening them out of their lives. He never
remembered how much he had disliked to be disturbed in this way when
he was a calf; he only thought that the hounds would scatter in all
directions after the herd. And so they did, while he cantered on to
the old home where he had known the Vixen and the Badger, took a good
bath, and then lay down chuckling at his own cleverness.

A very selfish old fellow you will call him, and I think you are
right; but unluckily stags do become selfish as they grow older. But
he always kept to the chivalrous rule that the post of honour in a
retreat is the rear-guard, and always ran behind the hinds when roused
with a herd of them by the hounds. Still, selfish he was, and though
he had profited by all of Aunt Yeld's early lessons, he forgot until
too late the last words that she had spoken to him, even though as a
calf he had once saved her life.




CHAPTER XI


One beautiful morning at the very end of September our Stag was lying
in the short plantations above the cliffs in a warm sunny bed of which
he had long been very fond, when his ear was disturbed, as had so
often happened before, by the cry of hounds. He did not mind it so
much now, for he knew that it meant at any rate that they were hunting
some other deer than himself. And it was plain to him that they had
found the stag that they wanted, for not two or three couple but
seventeen or eighteen were speaking to the scent. Therefore he lay
quite still, never doubting that before long they would leave the
covert. And so it seemed that it would be, for presently the cry
ceased, and he had good reason to hope that they had gone away. The
only thing that disquieted him was that the horses seemed always to be
moving all over the plantation, instead of galloping over the moor. He
was still lying fast when he heard two horses come trotting up to
within thirty yards of his lair; and peering carefully through the
branches he saw them and recognised them. One of them was the fair man
whom he had seen so often before, still riding the same grey horse,
which was grown so light as to be almost white. But the man was
greatly changed. His face was thin and hollow, and would have been
pale if it had not been burnt brown; the tiny hair on the upper lip
had grown to a great red moustache; and the blue eyes were sunk deep
in his head. And he rode with his reins in his right hand, for his
left was hung in a sling, so that he could hardly hold his whip. But
for all that he was as quick and lively as ever, and his eyes never
ceased roving over the plantation. And by him rode the beautiful girl
whom he had seen with him before, her face aglow with happiness; and
she seemed so proud of him that she never took her eyes off his face
for an instant, except now and then to glance pityingly at his wounded
hand. They pulled up not far from the Stag and waited.

And presently a hind came up, cantering anxiously through the
plantation, for she had laid her calf down and did not wish to go far
from him. She blundered on so close to the Stag that he would have
got up and driven her away if he had not been afraid of being seen.
But she passed on, and very soon the hounds came up after her. Then
the man brought the white horse across them, trying hard to stop them
from her line, but he could not use his whip; and they only swerved
past him, still running hard, straight to the bed of the Stag. And up
he jumped, his glossy coat gleaming bright in the sun, and every hound
leaped forward with a cry of exultation as he rose.

He went off at the top of his speed straight through the plantation,
for he knew that he had the better of the hounds through the thicket.
But they ran harder than he had ever known since the day when they had
driven him to sea as a yearling, and, as he could wind no other deer,
he made up his mind to cross the moor for the friendly valley where he
had lived so long. So turning his head from the sea he leaped out of
the plantation, and ran down to the water below. He would gladly have
taken a bath then and there, but the hounds were too close; so
splashing boldly through it he cantered aslant up the steep hill
beyond as though it had been level ground. And when he gained the top,
he felt the West wind strike cool upon him, and saw the long waves of
heather and grass rise before him till they met the sky. Then he set
his face bravely for the highest point, for beyond it was the refuge
that he sought.

And on he went, and on and on, cantering steadily but very fast, for
though he heard no sound of their tongues he knew that the hounds were
racing after him, as mute as mice. The blackcock fled away screaming
before him, the hawk high in air wheeled aside as he passed, but on he
went through the sweet, pink heather, without pausing to notice them.
Then the heather became sparse and thin, growing only in ragged tufts
amid the rank red grass and sheets of white bog-flower. He had lain in
this wet ground many times, but no deer was there to help him to-day.
Then the wet ground was passed and the heather came again, sound and
firm, sloping down to a brown peat-stream. Never had its song sounded
so sweet in his ears, never had he longed more for a bath in the amber
water, but the hounds were still racing and he dared not wait. So he
splashed on through the stream and up another ridge, where the heather
grew but thinly amid a wilderness of hot stones. The sun smote
fiercely upon him, and the air was close as he cantered down from the
ridge into the combe beyond it, but he cared not, for he knew that
there again was water. He ran up it for a few yards, but only for a
few yards, for the hounds were still running their hardest, and he
must wait till the great slope of grass before him was past.

So he breasted it gallantly, up, and up, and up. The grass was thick
over the treacherous ground, but his foot was still too light to
pierce it, and he cantered steadily on. His mouth was growing parched,
but he still felt strong, and he knew that when the hill was crossed
he would find more water to welcome him. At last he reached the
summit, and there spread out before him were Dartmoor and the sea, and
far, far below him the haven of his choice; and the cool breeze from
the sea breathed upon his nostrils, and he gathered strength and hope.
There was still one more hollow to be crossed before he reached the
long slope down to the valley, but there was water in it, and he might
have time for a hasty draught. So still he pressed on with the same
steady stride, hoping that he might wait at any rate for a few minutes
in the stream, for thirst and heat were growing upon him, and he
longed for a bath. But no! it was dangerous to wait; and he turned
away sick at heart from the sparkling ripple, and faced the ascent
before him. And now the grass seemed to coil wickedly round his
dew-claws as if striving to hold them down; and he tugged his feet
impatiently from its grasp, though more than once he had half a mind
to turn back to the water. But he had chosen his refuge, and he
struggled gamely on.

At last he was at the top, and only one long unbroken slope of heather
lay between him and the valley that he knew so well; and he turned
into a long, deep combe which ran down to it, that he might not be
seen. Down, and down, and down he ran, steadying himself and
recovering his breath. At every stride he saw the trickle of water
from the head of the combe grow larger and larger as other trickles
joined it from every side, and he knew that he was near his refuge at
last. Presently he came upon a patch of yellow gorse, which had thrust
up its flaming head through the heather, and he plunged heavily
through it, knowing that it would check the hounds. Another few
hundred yards and he was within the covert, in the cool deep shade of
the oak-coppice, with the merry river brawling beneath him.

And he scrambled down eagerly through the trees and plunged into the
brown water. How delicious it was after that fierce race over the
heather, running cool and full and strong under the shadow of the
coppice! He hardly paused to drink, but ran straight down stream, for
his heart misgave him that the hounds had gained on him while he was
struggling up the last steep ascent. And the water carried him on, now
racing down his dew-claws, now lapping round his hocks, now rising
quiet and still almost to his mane, sometimes for a few seconds
raising him off his weary legs and bearing him gently down.

Only too soon he heard the deep voice of the hounds throwing their
tongues as they entered the wood, but he kept running steadily down,
refreshed at every step by the sweet, cool water, and screened from
all view by the canopy of hazel and alder that overhung it. At last he
left it, and turning up into the woods ran on through them down the
valley. Once he tried to scale the hill to the next valley, but he
found the air hot and stifling under the dense green leaves, and he
felt so much distressed that he turned back and continued his way
down. Presently there rose up faintly behind him the deep note that he
knew so well of the old black and tan hound; then the voices of other
hounds chimed in together with it, and he knew that they had hit the
place at which he had left the water. He heard the sound of the horn
come floating down the valley, and tried hard to mend his pace, but he
could not; and at last he was fain to leave the wood and come back to
the water.

Again he ran down, and again the friendly stream coursed round him and
revived him. So he splashed on for a time and then he sought the woods
anew in hope of finding help, but he could not stay in them long, and
returned once more to the water. At last, on turning round a bend in
the stream, he came upon a Heron, standing watching for eels, and he
cried out to him, "Oh! stand still. I won't hurt you. Stand still till
the hounds come, and the men will think that I have not passed." But
the Heron was too shy to listen, and flapped heavily away. Then he
came to a bridge, where his passage was barred by a pole, but he threw
his horns back and managed to jump between the pole and the arch,
without touching anything, and though he could not help splashing the
pole, he made his way down without leaving the water.

At length he came to the end of the woods, and here he hesitated,
longing for some one to tell him about the stream further down, for
it was strange to him. And he remembered Aunt Yeld's words, "May you
never know what it is to look for help and to find none." But he could
hear nothing of the hounds, and almost began to hope that he might
have beaten them. So at last he found a corner thickly overhung with
branches, and there he lay down in the water. And then whom should he
see but the Lady Salmon making her way slowly up the stream, the very
friend who could tell him what he wanted to know.

But before he could speak to her she said, "Beware of going further
down, for there is a flood-gate across the stream which you cannot
pass. Have you seen my husband?"

And he told her, "Yes," and she swam on, while he lay still and made
up his mind where he would go if the hounds came on. The hounds indeed
had dropped behind him, for the men could not believe that the Deer
could have leaped the pole under the bridge, and had taken them to try
for him somewhere else. But the old black and tan hound had tried to
walk along the pole to wind it before they came up, and having fallen
into the water and been swept on past the bridge, was still trying
downward by himself. And thus it was that while the Deer was lying in
the water the old hound came up alone. He seemed to have made up his
mind that the Stag was near, for he stopped and kept sniffing round
him in all directions till at last he crept in under the bank, caught
sight of him, and threw his head into the air with a loud triumphant
bay. The Stag leaped to his feet in an instant and dashed at him, but
the old hound shrank back and saved himself; and then the Stag broke
out of the water, for he had made up his mind to breast the hill, and
push on for Bremridge Wood. He knew the way, for it was that which the
Partridge had shown him, and he felt that by a great effort he could
reach it.

And as he slanted painfully up the steep ascent he heard the old hound
still baying with disappointment and rage; for he could not scramble
up the steep bank so quickly as the Deer, and the more he bayed the
further he was left behind. Further up the valley the Stag could hear
the horn and hallooing of men, but he pressed on bravely and gained
the top of the hill at last. But when he reached it his neck was
bowed, his tongue was parched, and his legs staggered under him. Still
he struggled on. He was in the enclosed country now, but he knew every
field and every rack, and he scrambled over the banks and hurled
himself over the gates as pluckily as if he had but just been roused.
Thus at last he reached the familiar wood. A Jay flew screaming before
him as he entered it, but he heeded her not. His head was beginning to
swim, but he still knew the densest quarter of the covert and made his
way to it. The brambles clutched at him and the branches tripped him
at every step, yet he never paused, but shook them off and went
crashing and blundering on, till at length with one gigantic leap he
hurled himself into the thickest of the underwood and lay fast.

After a time he heard the note of a hound entering the wood, and he
knew the voice, but he lay still. Then other hounds came up speaking
also, and he heard them working slowly towards his hiding-place. But
as they drew near the thicket the voices were less numerous, and only
a few hounds seemed to have strength and courage to face it. He caught
the voice of the black and tan hound speaking fitfully as he came
nearer and nearer, and more impatiently as he struggled with the
brambles and binders that barred his way. At last it reached the place
from which he had leaped into his refuge, and there it fell silent.
Still the hound cast on, and from a path far above came the voice of
a man encouraging him, and encouraging other hounds to help him. But
the Deer lay like a stone, while the hounds tried all round within
only a few yards of him, when all of a sudden the old hound caught the
wind of him and made a bound at him where he lay. The Deer jumped to
his feet and faced him, and the old hound bayed again with triumph,
but dared not come within reach. So there they stood for two whole
minutes till the other hounds came up all round him. Then one hound in
his insolence came too near, and in an instant the Deer reared up, and
plunging his antlers deep into his side, fairly pinned him to the
ground, so that the hound never moved again. Then he broke through the
rest of them, spurning them wide with horn and hoof, and crashed on
through the covert towards the valley.

And as he came to the edge of the wood he heard the song of the
peat-stream rise before him, and knew that he had still one refuge
left. Reeling and desperate he scrambled out of the wood and leaped
down into the park at its foot. The Fallow-Deer were not to be seen,
for they had heard the cry of the hounds in the wood and had hidden
themselves in alarm among the trees, but the Stag heard the voice of
the stream calling to him louder than he had ever heard it, and he
heeded nought else. And he ran towards the place where he heard it
call loudest, and found it rushing round a bend, very smoothly and
quietly, but very swiftly. At every foot below it seemed to rush
faster, till fifty yards down it struck against a bridge of three
arches, through which it raced like a cataract and poured down with a
thundering roar into a boiling pool beneath.

And the Stag leaped in and set his back against some alders that grew
on the opposite bank, choosing his place cunningly where he could
stand but the hounds must swim. Then he clenched his teeth and threw
back his head, and dared his enemies to do their worst. And the brown
stream washed merrily round him, singing low, but as sweetly as he had
ever heard it.

    "_Come down with me, come. Oh! merry and free_
    _Is the race from the forest away to the sea._
    _The pool is before me; I hark to its call_
    _And I hasten my speed for the leap o'er the fall._
    _The Salmon are waiting impatient below,_
    _I feel them spring upward as over I go._
    _Come down with me, come; why linger you here?_
    _You know me, the friend of the wild Red-Deer._"

Then the voice of the water was broken, for the black and tan hound
came bounding down in advance of the rest over the grass to the water,
caught view of the Deer where he stood, and throwing up his head bayed
loud and deep and long. And other hounds came hurrying down through
the wood, speaking quick and short, for they were mad with impatience;
and bursting through the fence straight to the black and tan hound
they joined their voices in exultation to his. Then a few, a very few,
men came up hastening with what speed they might on their weary,
hobbling horses, a man on a white horse leading them, and they added
their wild yells to the baying of the hounds, while ever and anon the
shrill tones of the horn rose high above them all in short, quick,
jubilant notes. Soon some of the hounds grew tired of baying in front
and flew round to the bank behind him, still yelling fiercely in
impotent rage; and the maddening clamour rang far up the valley
through the sweet, still evening. The Fallow-Deer huddled themselves
close among the trees, and the pigeons hushed their cooing and flew
swift and high in the air from the terror of the sound. But the Stag
stood unmoved in the midst of the baying ring, with his noble head
thrown back and his chin raised scornfully aloft, in all the pride
and majesty of defiance.

But all the while the stream kept pressing him downward inch by inch,
very gently but very surely. Once a hound, in his impatience, burst
through the branches and ran out on the stem of an alder almost on to
his back, so that he was obliged to move down still lower. And there
the stream pressed him still more strongly, though never unkindly, and
he went downward faster than before; and he heard the full voice of
the torrent, as it thundered over the fall, chanting to him grand and
sonorous in a deep tone of command.

    "_Nay, tarry no longer; come down, come down_
    _To the pool that invites you, still, peaceful, and brown._
    _One plunge through the rush of the shivering spray_
    _And the dark, solemn eddies shall bear you away_
    _From the rustle of bubbles, the hissing of foam,_
    _To a haven of rest, and a long, long home._
    _Come down with me, come; your refuge is near;_
    _I call you, the friend of the wild Red-Deer._"

And he heard it and yielded. The water rose higher, and the strength
of the current grew more urgent about him, till at length the stream
lifted him gently off his weary feet and bore him silently down. For
a moment he strove with all his might to stem the smooth, impetuous
tide as it swept him on; then he gave himself up to the friendly
waters, and throwing his head high in air in a last defiance, he went
down swiftly over the fall.

And the wild baying ceased; and he heard nothing but the chorus of the
waters in his ears. Once he struggled to raise his head, and the great
brown antlers came looming up for a moment through the eddies; but as
he passed down to the deep, still pool beyond the fall, the water
called to him so kindly that he could not but obey.

    "_From my wild forest-cradle, through deep and through shoal,_
    _You have followed me far, and have reached to the goal._
    _Now the gallop is ended, the chase it is run,_
    _The struggle is over, the victory won._
    _The fall is o'er-leaped and the rapids are passed,_
    _Come rest on my bosom untroubled at last._
    _Nay, raise not your head, come, bury it here;_
    _No friend like the stream to the wild Red-Deer._"

So the waters closed over the stern, sharp antlers, and he bowed his
head and was at peace.

Then men came and pulled the great still body out of the water; and
they took his head and hung it up in memory of so great a run and so
gallant a Stag. But their triumph was only over the empty shell of
him, for his spirit had gone to the still brown pool. And indeed the
stream has received many another wild deer besides him, which, I
suspect, is the reason why ferns, that love the water, take the shape
of stags' horns and of harts' tongues. So there he remains; for he had
fought his fight and run his course; and he asks for nothing better
than to hear the river sing to him all the day long.


RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BUNGAY




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note: The original edition did not contain a table of
contents. A table of contents has been created for this electronic
edition. Also, the following corrections were made to the original
text.

In Chapter III, "got old of a whole hind-leg" was changed to "got hold
of a whole hind-leg".

In Chapter VIII, "presently he stopped swiming" was changed to
"presently he stopped swimming".

In Chapter IX, a missing quotation mark was added before "Well, you
see", and "The man looked a littlle older" was changed to "The man
looked a little older".





End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of a Red Deer, by J. W. Fortescue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF A RED DEER ***

***** This file should be named 33384.txt or 33384.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/3/8/33384/

Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
