The Project Gutenberg eBook, Washer the Raccoon, by George Ethelbert
Walsh, Illustrated by Edwin John Prittie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Washer the Raccoon


Author: George Ethelbert Walsh



Release Date: April 21, 2013  [eBook #42575]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WASHER THE RACCOON***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Matthew Wheaton, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the lovely original illustrations.
      See 42575-h.htm or 42575-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42575/42575-h/42575-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42575/42575-h.zip)





    [Illustration: HIS BOARD WAS RAISED ON THE CREST OF A WAVE AND
    THEN TOSSED OVER THE FALLS]


Twilight Animal Series

WASHER THE RACCOON

by

GEORGE ETHELBERT WALSH

Author of "Bumper the White Rabbit," "Bumper the White Rabbit
in the Woods," "Bumper the White Rabbit and His Foes," "Bumper
the White Rabbit and His Friends," "Bobby Gray Squirrel," "Bobby
Gray Squirrel's Adventures," Etc.

Colored Illustrations by Edwin John Prittie







The John C. Winston Company
Chicago Philadelphia Toronto

      *      *      *      *      *      *

    TWILIGHT ANIMAL SERIES
    FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    FROM 4 TO 10 YEARS OF AGE

    By
    GEORGE ETHELBERT WALSH


    LIST OF TITLES
     1 BUMPER THE WHITE RABBIT
     2 BUMPER THE WHITE RABBIT IN THE WOODS
     3 BUMPER THE WHITE RABBIT AND HIS FOES
     4 BUMPER THE WHITE RABBIT AND HIS FRIENDS
     5 BOBBY GRAY SQUIRREL
     6 BOBBY GRAY SQUIRREL'S ADVENTURES
     7 BUSTER THE BIG BROWN BEAR
     8 BUSTER THE BIG BROWN BEAR'S ADVENTURES
     9 WHITE TAIL THE DEER
    10 WHITE TAIL THE DEER'S ADVENTURES
    11 WASHER, THE RACCOON

    (Other titles in preparation)

    Issued in uniform style with this volume

    PRICE 65 CENTS EACH, Postpaid

    EACH VOLUME CONTAINS COLORED ILLUSTRATIONS

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Printed in U. S. A.
Copyright 1922 by
The John C. Winston Company

Copyright MCMXVII by George E. Walsh




INTRODUCTION TO THE TWILIGHT ANIMAL STORIES

BY THE AUTHOR


All little boys and girls who love animals should become acquainted
with Bumper the white rabbit, with Bobby Gray Squirrel, with Buster
the bear, and with White Tail the deer, for they are all a jolly lot,
brave and fearless in danger, and so lovable that you won't lay
down any one of the books without saying wistfully, "I almost wish
I had them really and truly as friends and not just storybook
acquaintances." That, of course, is a splendid wish; but none of us
could afford to have a big menagerie of wild animals, and that's just
what you would have to do if you went outside of the books. Bumper had
many friends, such as Mr. Blind Rabbit, Fuzzy Wuzz and Goggle Eyes,
his country cousins; and Bobby Gray Squirrel had his near cousins,
Stripe the chipmunk and Webb the flying squirrel; while Buster and
White Tail were favored with an endless number of friends and
relatives. If we turned them all loose from the books, and put them
in a ten acre lot--but no, ten acres wouldn't be big enough to
accommodate them, perhaps not a hundred acres.

So we will leave them just where they are--in the books--and read
about them, and let our imaginations take us to them where we can see
them playing, skipping, singing, and sometimes fighting, and if we
read very carefully, and _think_ as we go along, we may come to know
them even better than if we went out hunting for them.

Another thing we should remember. By leaving them in the books,
hundreds and thousands of other boys and girls can enjoy them, too,
sharing with us the pleasures of the imagination, which after all is
one of the greatest things in the world. In gathering them together in
a real menagerie, we would be selfish both to Bumper, Bobby, Buster,
White Tail and their friends as well as to thousands of other little
readers who could not share them with us. So these books of Twilight
Animal Stories are dedicated to all little boys and girls who love
wild animals. All others are forbidden to read them! They wouldn't
understand them if they did.

So come out into the woods with me, and let us listen and watch, and I
promise you it will be worth while.




    CONTENTS


    Washer's First Adventures                     9
    Washer is Carried to the Wolf's Den          15
    Mother Wolf Takes a Hand                     21
    Mother Wolf Saves Washer's Life              27
    Sneaky Visits Black Wolf                     35
    Mother Wolf Decides to Adopt Washer          43
    Washer Learns He is Not a Wolf               51
    The Cubs Tree a Stranger                     59
    Washer Saves One of His Own People           67
    Mother Wolf Listens to Washer's Story        75
    Washer is Introduced to the Wolf Pack        83
    Black Wolf Defies the Pack                   91
    Washer Goes to the Silver Birch Grove        99
    Washer Is Freed by Strangers                107
    The Cubs Listen to Washer's Plea            115
    Washer Finds His Mother and Brothers        123




WASHER THE RACCOON




STORY ONE

WASHER'S FIRST ADVENTURE


Washer was the youngest of a family of three Raccoons, born in the
woods close to the shores of Beaver Pond, and not half a mile from
Rocky Falls where the water, as you know, turns into silvery spray
that sparkles in the sun-shine like diamonds and rubies. And, indeed,
the animals and birds of the North Woods much prefer this glittering
spray and foam that rise in a steady cloud from the bottom of the
falls to all the jewels and gems ever dug out of the earth! For,
though each drop sparkles but a moment, and then vanishes from sight,
there are a million others to follow it, and when you bathe in them
they wash and scour away the dirt, and make you clean and fresh in
body and soul.

Washer had his first great adventure at Rocky Falls, and it is a
wonder that he ever lived to tell the tale, for the water which flows
over the falls is almost as cruel and terrible as it is sparkling and
inviting. But Washer knew nothing of this then, for he was a very
young Raccoon, and not quite responsible for all he did. Perhaps it
was Mother Raccoon that was to blame, for it was her duty to look
after her little ones until they were old enough to hunt for
themselves. It is a law of the woods that any mother of bird or animal
who neglects its young shall be punished.

The nature of the punishment has never been told, but in the case of
Washer's mother you can easily guess what it was. It was an uneasy
conscience that her neglect had caused her child's death, and she
would never see him again.

But Washer apparently had as many lives as a cat, for he was not
killed, and he lived long after his mother had given up all hopes of
ever seeing him again. No one--certainly no Raccoon--had ever gone
over Rocky Falls, and been heard of afterward. Therefore, Washer was
dead. Mother Raccoon believed that, and reported the sad news to all
her family and friends.

It was a bright, sunny day. Washer had been playing near the edge of
the river above the falls with his two brothers--playing very much as
three boys or three girls would do if let loose in the woods. They
were only baby Raccoons, and could not run very fast, and every time
they dipped a paw in the water they squealed and made a great noise.

It was perfectly safe near the shore, for a big tree blown down by the
wind cut off the swift current of the river and formed a little back
eddy. Mother Raccoon had told them they could wade around in the shoal
water, but she didn't say anything about not going in anywhere else.

Washer did not think he was doing anything wrong, therefore, when
growing tired of wading he crawled far out on the end of the big tree
lying on its side to watch the swift current flowing by. Pieces of
drift-wood, twigs, knots and sticks of wood of all sizes passed him in
an endless procession. He snatched at some of these with his paws, and
caught one or two.

Each time he was successful, he squealed with delight. Of course, he
grew bolder and more reckless until finally he stood on the end of the
very last branch of the fallen tree. From there he could reach more
sticks floating down stream. One particularly big one attracted his
attention. It was a little further out than the others, but Washer was
sure he could reach it.

But he missed it by an inch, and the force of the blow with his paw at
the stick unbalanced him. He clutched frantically at the tree branch.
It broke off close to the trunk, and Washer toppled over into the
deep, dark stream.

When he came up to the surface, he squealed as loud as he could:
"Help! Help!"

His two brothers playing inshore heard the cry, but they thought it
was one of Washer's tricks, and they paid no attention to it. But
Mother Raccoon, who had been dozing in the bushes, was quick to note
the cry of alarm, and she sprang up a stump to look around.

She had just one last glimpse of Washer. He was in the river,
struggling to crawl upon the big board that had caused his mishap.
Then board and Raccoon disappeared in the smother of the rapids, which
began just above the falls.

Mother Raccoon ran frantically along the banks of the river, calling
to Washer, but she knew there was no help for him. Nothing that she
could do would rescue him from the terrible adventure ahead.

Washer himself was more surprised than frightened at first. He was not
exactly afraid of the water, and the ducking didn't bother him; but
when he managed to climb upon the board and looked around he began to
feel more frightened than surprised. His frail boat was being twisted
and whirled around like a top, making him dizzy; the shore was
rushing past him, and all about him was foam and spray that sparkled
and glittered in the sun-light. But just then Washer wasn't much
interested in things that glistened.

He saw the top of the falls ahead. Toward that he was being hurried,
and the further he drifted the rougher grew the waters. His board
pitched and tossed, making it difficult for the baby Raccoon to cling
to it.

Washer was frightened, and in his fear he called loudly for his
mother; but the roar of the falls ahead drowned his voice.

It all happened quickly, and the end came before Washer could call
many times for his mother. His board was raised on the crest of a
wave, and then tossed over the falls, with Washer clinging desperately
to it.

Down, down, they went together, the water blinding and suffocating
him. It seemed as if the falls were miles and miles high, and that he
would never reach the river below. Of course, they were not as many
feet high as Washer mistook for miles. But it was high enough to kill
or drown most animals who went over the precipice.

It is hard to say just what saved Washer. Perhaps it was because he
was tougher than most Raccoons, or because he clung to the board and
when it bobbed up to the surface it had to bring him up with it.
Anyway, Washer finally got the spray out of his eyes, and found
himself floating down the lower river with the falls behind him.

He had taken the dip of death, and survived it. He was out of all
immediate danger. For the first time then he had eyes to admire the
sparkling mist and spray rising like a million diamonds from the top
and bottom of the falls.

"I must get ashore now, and dry myself," he said to himself. "I was
never so wet in all my life."

He began paddling with his front paws, and in this way gradually
directed his raft toward the shore. When he was near enough he took a
flying leap and landed on a log and clung to it.

But he was in a strange country, and far from home, and he began to be
afraid again. Just when he thought he would break down and cry, he
heard a sniffing noise in the bushes, and looking up he found himself
face to face with a big, shaggy animal, whose fierce, glaring eyes
sent the shivers all through him. It was Sneaky the Wolf, who had been
watching him land, and in the next story you will hear of what Sneaky
did to him.




STORY TWO

WASHER IS CARRIED TO THE WOLF'S DEN


Washer felt his little heart throb at the sight of the yellow eyes
watching him, and the shaggy body of Sneaky seemed bigger than that of
any animal he had ever dreamed of in the North Woods. Washer gave a
frenzied little squeak, and tried to hop back upon his raft; but he
did not get far. Sneaky pounced down upon him, and the double row of
white teeth closed upon his back and scruff of the neck.

"Oh, please--please, don't kill me!" shrieked Washer, almost fainting
from fear.

But Sneaky paid no attention to his appeal. The powerful jaws held him
a prisoner. Every moment Washer expected they would close tighter and
crunch his bones.

But apparently the Wolf had no idea of killing him right away. Washer,
young as he was, knew that many of the wild animals of the woods
teased and tortured their victims before killing them. Some of his own
people had been guilty of this very cruelty. Washer, knowing now how
it felt, decided that if he ever escaped he would never torture any
one--no, never, not as long as he lived!

Sneaky picked him up in his mouth, and began trotting away through the
bushes, carrying Washer as easily as a cat carries its kittens. The
jaws of the Wolf were closed uncomfortably tight on his neck, but
after all they did not actually hurt the poor little Raccoon. The
sharp, white teeth did not go through his thick fur and tough skin.

For a long time Sneaky trotted along in a mechanical lope, never once
opening his mouth to speak, although Washer kept pleading with him,
hoping that he would loosen his hold on his neck the minute he opened
his mouth to say a word. Sneaky was too wise for that, for no Wolf can
talk and still keep his mouth closed. He can growl and grumble, but
not actually talk.

They passed through the thickest part of the woods, and then began
climbing a rough trail among the rocks and stones. Then they came to a
brook, which Sneaky crossed by jumping from stone to stone, and after
that the Wolf followed a path that lead to the mouth of a cave.

When Washer saw this he opened his mouth in a series of pitiful cries,
for he knew this was the entrance to the Wolf's den. He could tell
this by the peculiar smell of the place. The air was filled with odors
that made the baby Raccoon hold his breath.

But Sneaky was still silent and dumb. He trotted through the entrance
and disappeared in the darkness of the cave. At first Washer could see
nothing, but then gradually his eyes grew accustomed to the place, and
his last hope vanished when he saw another Wolf almost as big as
Sneaky and three little cubs playing at her feet.

"What have you here, Sneaky?" Mother Wolf growled when her lordly mate
appeared.

Sneaky deposited Washer at the foot of Mother Wolf, and spoke for the
first time. "A nice little dinner for you and the children," he said.
"I brought him home alive so you could show the babies how to kill. It
will be great sport watching them."

At the sound of his voice, Washer made a desperate effort to escape,
but Sneaky's paw came down on his back and held him.

"He's a lively little Raccoon," Sneaky remarked, grinning so his white
teeth showed.

Mother Wolf looked at Washer, turned him over with a paw, and sniffed
at him. Then she raised her head and looked at her mate. "He's only a
baby Raccoon," she said. "Where'd you find the nest? And what did you
do with the others? Ate them up, I suppose! That's why you're so
generous in bringing this one home to us."

Washer thought there was a look of disgust in the eyes and voice, and
Sneaky evidently thought so, too, for he looked a little crestfallen,
and then said: "No, I didn't find his nest. He was floating down the
river on a board, and when he landed I caught him."

Mother Wolf sniffed again, and looked a little incredulous. She turned
Washer over again. "He's a mere baby," she murmured, "not much older
than our dear little ones."

"Yes, and he'll be sweet and tender," added Sneaky, stretching
himself. "It won't hurt our children to eat part of him after they've
killed him."

Mother Wolf did not seem anxious to kill Washer, nor was she ready to
teach her little ones to kill. "We won't kill him today," she said
finally. "My little ones are well fed, and they couldn't eat more
without hurting them. We will keep him until tomorrow."

Sneaky was a little hurt at this remark, for he had planned to help
with the feast when the others had eaten all they wanted, and he
growled disconsolately: "What'll we do with him over night? He'll try
to escape from us when we're asleep."

"Put him in with the children, and I'll watch him," replied Mother
Wolf. "I never sleep with both eyes shut."

Mother Wolf was boss of the den, for Sneaky grumblingly picked up
Washer once more and carried him into the darkest corner of the cave
and dropped him down among the little sleeping cubs. Their warm bodies
felt good to Washer, and he crawled up close to them. He knew that he
would not be killed until the next day, and he was very tired and
sleepy.

Within ten minutes he was sleeping as soundly as the Wolf cubs,
snuggling close up to them with his little body half buried from sight
by the legs and paws of his strange bed fellows. He did not know that
once or twice in the night time, Mother Wolf came over and looked down
at him, with a very, very queer expression in her eyes. Each time, she
walked away, grumbling to herself: "He's only a baby--a little baby."

It was morning before Washer opened his eyes, although it was so dark
in the cave he could not tell that the sun was shining outside. Sneaky
and Mother Wolf were still sleeping, snoring away so that the den was
filled with queer echoes. But if the parents were asleep, the three
little Wolf cubs were wide awake. They were rolling and tumbling over
each other, pulling and hauling each other's tails, and pretending to
bite and scratch. Before Washer realized it he was being hugged and
squeazed and jerked around as if he was a baby wolf, and not a baby
Raccoon.

Of course, his first idea was to snap and bite at the cubs, but on
second thought he decided, not to. If he hurt one of them Sneaky or
Mother Wolf would pounce upon him and kill him in a flash. No, he had
to play carefully with his bed-fellows.

They were soft, warm little bodies rolling all over him, and they
never scratched or bit, but merely pretended to. Washer took care that
he was as gentle, and pretty soon he was so absorbed in the play that
he forgot they were his enemies.

Suddenly he looked up, and saw Mother Wolf standing over him. She had
been watching him for some time. Fearful lest she had come to kill
him, he doubled up in a ball and began to shake and tremble. From
another corner, Sneaky yawned and came forth to look at the cubs.
Mother Wolf turned to him.

"He's very playful," she said. "I don't think I'll kill him today. You
must go out and get me something else to eat."

Sneaky growled his disapproval, but obeyed, and the minute he was gone
Washer felt all his fear vanish. What happened in the cave next will
appear in the following story.




STORY THREE

MOTHER WOLF TAKES A HAND


Washer was very lonely without his mother or brothers, and very
homesick; but the little wolves were so playful they gave him little
time to think of his worry. Whenever he curled up in a corner to mope
and sigh, one of the cubs was sure to creep up behind and roll all
over him. Sometimes they got so mixed up that it was difficult for
Mother Wolf to tell her own children from the raccoon.

Meanwhile, Sneaky had been out hunting, and returned with food for his
family. He flung it to the little cubs, and said:

"Eat, little ones, and may it make you strong and stout of heart like
your father!"

He gave none to Washer, but Mother Wolf stepped in and divided the
food evenly. "Here, Little Stranger of the woods, you must eat too, or
you'll grow thin and die."

Sneaky did not like this, and displayed his sharp, cruel teeth. "Why
should a stranger rob my children of their food?" he asked. "I do not
hunt for another's brat."

"If he doesn't eat," replied Mother Wolf, smiling, "How can he grow
fat? Our children must have their food rich and juicy."

Sneaky grinned at this retort, for it was quite true that all wolves
liked fat little animals. It made the meat so much more delicious. He
was content to hunt food for Washer if it fattened him up for the
cubs.

Every day when he returned to his den, he would ask: "Isn't the Little
Stranger fat enough to kill today?"

And always Mother Wolf would reply: "Not today. We must wait another
day."

Of course, all this conversation worried and frightened Washer, for he
knew that in a short time he would be killed to make food for his
playmates. It sickened and terrified him so that he finally decided to
make the effort to escape from the cave. He had been so gentle, and
appeared so contented, that he was given more liberty each day. When
the cubs played in front of the cave, Washer was permitted to go there
with them.

This gave him an idea. One day when Sneaky was away in the woods
hunting, and Mother Wolf was sleeping in front of the cave, Washer
suggested to the cubs that they play hide and seek in the bushes. This
was great sport, and they began scampering around behind the bushes to
hide.

When it came Washer's turn to hide, he ran further away from the
mouth of the cave than at any time before. He looked around him, and
saw that a deep ravine was just beyond his hiding place.

"Now is my chance," he said to himself. "If I can escape into that
ravine, they'll never catch me. I can hide until night, and then
journey far into the woods."

He had no sooner decided upon this than he began scampering for the
edge of the ravine. If he once reached the edge of the cliff, he could
roll down it, and then hide at the bottom until dark.

He could hear the cubs calling him, but he paid no attention to them.
Liberty was ahead, and he ran with all his might. His legs were short
and weak, and he could not make as good time as he wished. He stumbled
once or twice and rolled over and over. But he was on his feet again,
running for dear life, before you could count ten.

Tired and panting, he finally reached the edge of the ravine. When he
looked down it, he was a little frightened. It was terribly steep and
the bottom a long way off.

"I wonder if it will hurt me," he murmured aloud. "I might run around
it, and not fall in it."

Just when he had made up his mind to do this there was a noise in the
bushes behind him, and through the air came Mother Wolf, loping along
at a tremendous speed. Washer ducked his head, and tried to hide, but
Mother Wolf had seen him. A big paw came down on his back and
flattened him to the earth.

"Where are you going, Little Stranger?" the Wolf asked. "Why are you
running away from us?"

Now Washer's first thought was to deny that he was running away, but
he knew that it was useless to try to deceive Mother Wolf. He realized
now that she had been watching him out of the corners of her eyes all
the time. She had not been asleep at all. So Washer decided to tell
the truth.

"I didn't want to be killed," he said. "I'm growing fatter every day,
and soon you will kill me for your children. O Mother Wolf, do you
know how it feels to be killed?"

"No, I don't suppose I do," was the reply. "I've never been killed."

"Then let me tell you it's worse than anything you can dream of,"
panted Washer.

"How do you know, Little Stranger?" Mother Wolf smiled as she asked
this. "You've never been killed."

"No, but can't you imagine how it would feel?"

"Imagine! What is that? I never heard of such a thing."

"Why--imagination is something that helps you to feel just as if the
real thing was happening."

Mother Wolf released Washer and let him sit up again. She squatted
down before him and looked into his eyes.

"I don't believe wolves have what you call imagination," she replied.
"No, I'm sure they don't. Tell me more what it means."

Washer was a very young little Raccoon to be instructing a full-grown
wolf, but all of his family had been born with imagination. He could
remember how he and his brothers had often listened to the storms
raging through the woods and had tried to imagine how it would feel
without any home to protect them. They had shuddered at the thought
and crept closer together in their nest. But it was very difficult to
tell in words just what imagination was.

"Why, there isn't much more to tell," he replied hesitatingly. "It's
something you have to feel. Have you ever been hurt, Mother Wolf?"

"Yes, I burnt my front paw once in a fire that campers had left in the
woods."

"And it hurt terribly, didn't it?"

Mother Wolf winced and nodded.

"Then," added Washer triumphantly, "if you can feel it now you have
imagination. You don't really feel it now, but you imagine how it
felt."

"Yes," replied Mother Wolf, "but that's something I did feel once. But
I was never killed. So how can I imagine how it would feel to be
killed?"

"Just think of your burnt foot, and then think of being burnt all
over. You would know then how it would feel to be killed. Oh, it's
terrible!"

Mother Wolf was quiet for a long time, and then she looked not
unkindly at Washer. "Was that why you were running away?" she asked
finally.

"Yes, I didn't want to be killed."

"Then listen, Little Stranger," she said. "You're not going to be
killed. I'm going to keep you to play with my little ones, and to
teach them things that no wolf can teach them. I will adopt you, and
make you one of my own children. No harm will ever come to you. Now
come back home with me."

Washer's heart gave a great bound of relief, and he licked the paw
near him. He trotted back to the den by the side of Mother Wolf happy
and contented; but in the next story you will hear what Sneaky thought
of this new arrangement.




STORY FOUR

MOTHER WOLF SAVES WASHER'S LIFE


Sneaky came home early that day, bringing with him a good size fox
which he displayed to his young cubs with much satisfaction. Licking
his chops and puffing out his cheeks with pride, he said:

"See what a great hunter I am! Nothing escapes me! I risk my life for
your sakes, and you must learn to be as good hunters when you grow
up."

Mother Wolf smiled a little queerly at the boast of her mate, and when
he was through she asked:

"Did you have to risk your life to catch Mr. Fox?"

Sneaky turned and looked a little sheepish, and answered in a voice of
wounded pride: "Yes, I nearly slipped off the rock into the water
trying to bring him down. It was a great jump I made. It must have
been nearly as long as the river is wide."

"I know you're a great jumper," replied Mother Wolf, still smiling.
"The greatest jump I ever saw you make was when Loup the Lynx pursued
you in the timber below the falls."

Now reference to this adventure always angered Sneaky, for he had not
come out of it with much glory. He had quarreled with Loup over a
prize, and in the end they had snarled and snapped at each other like
two wild cats. Finally, Loup had lost his temper and sprang at
Sneaky's throat, who avoided it by a hair's breadth, and if there
hadn't been a wide chasm near the wolf might have lost his life. With
a tremendous spring he had cleared the chasm where he could defy the
Lynx at a safe distance.

"My dear," Sneaky began, scowling at his mate, "I took that jump just
to show Loup what I could do. If he had followed me, I surely would
have killed him."

Mother Wolf laughed and cuddled up to one of her little ones. "I know,
Sneaky, you're very brave," she said.

That was all, but the way she said it angered Sneaky. It was just as
if she had said, "Oh, yes, you're very brave when there's no danger
around."

Sneaky switched his tail angrily, and bared his white teeth. Just then
he might have done something courageous if there had been a chance,
for he was very sore and disturbed that Mother Wolf should speak of
his bravery in such a flippant way before his children.

Suddenly he caught sight of Washer, who had been looking and listening
in silence. His eyes gleamed with a yellow light.

"Ah!" he said, stretching out a paw and grasping Washer. "Our Little
Stranger is very fat. I think now I'll kill him. Yes, he's very fat,"
he added, as he felt of Washer's ribs.

Washer was so startled and frightened by this sudden attack that he
began squealing and panting for breath. But the louder he cried the
more it pleased Sneaky. The heavy paw pressing down upon his back
threatened to break his spine.

Mother Wolf suddenly sprang to Washer's rescue. Her own eyes showed
baleful yellow, and her teeth, fully as white and long as Sneaky's,
were bared to the gums.

"Take your paw off!" she said sharply. "How dare you act like that? If
you touch one of my children again you'll go forth to hunt and never
return."

"One of your children!" exclaimed Sneaky. "You call this little brat
one of your children!"

"Yes, I have adopted him, and I shall raise him to hunt with the pack.
You cannot hurt him!"

Sneaky was too surprised at first to speak, but after a long pause he
recovered and laid his head back on his shoulders while a most
startling yowl escaped from his throat. It was such a blood-curdling
yelp that Washer cringed and cowered in fear. But it was not a battle
cry; it was simply Sneaky's way of expressing his merriment. Mother
Wolf watched him in silence until he stopped.

"I cannot hurt him!" Sneaky repeated. "My dear, you forget he belongs
to me. I caught him, and to me he belongs. Isn't that the law of the
pack? Who shall deny me what belongs to me?"

"You forget another law of the pack," snapped Mother Wolf. "Half of
the hunt belongs to me and the children. Isn't that the law?"

"Oh, yes, so it is," smiled Sneaky. "Half belongs to my family, and I
shall divide with them. Which half do you want, my dear?"

There was a sinister look in the yellow eyes. Mother Wolf read his
intentions, and so did Washer. Sneaky intended to divide the Raccoon
in two equal halves. How could he do that without killing him?

Mother Wolf seemed puzzled for an instant, for she could not break the
law of the pack, not even to save Washer from death. But an idea came
to her finally, and the light of hope returned to her eyes.

"You cannot divide him until I'm ready, Sneaky," she added. "That also
is a law of the pack. And I'm not a bit hungry now. I've really eaten
more than is good for me. You must save the Little Stranger until I'm
ready to eat my half."

Sneaky was greatly chagrined and angered by Mother Wolf's words, for
he too had to obey the law of the pack, and he knew that what his mate
had said was true. He could not kill Washer without the consent of
Mother Wolf, and right down in his heart he knew that she would never
give that consent. But if there was a law against killing Washer at
once there was none against tormenting him. Sneaky was naturally
cruel, and the thought that he could even in this way made his eyes
light up suddenly.

"I'll wait, my dear, until you are ready to eat your half," he said in
a fawning voice. "The fact is I've eaten rather heartily myself today,
too, and we have this fox for our supper. I'll keep the little brat
until he's needed. Now go back to your corner!"

With that he gave Washer a cuff with his paw that sent him spinning
across the cave.

"Why did you do that?" snarled Mother Wolf, springing before Sneaky.

"I wanted to prepare him for what's coming," drawled Sneaky. "If we
harden and toughen him he won't mind so much being eaten."

He grinned at this remark, and made another dive for Washer; but this
time the little raccoon escaped and burrowed under the wolf cubs to
hide.

"Come out of that!" snapped Sneaky.

He began pawing and scratching to get at Washer when something
happened that startled every one in the cave. There was a swift thud
and then a snapping of sharp teeth. A howl of pain escaped Sneaky's
throat, followed by a whimpering cry of fear.

Mother Wolf had sprang at him and caught him by the scruff of the neck
with her powerful jaws, and was shaking him much as a dog would shake
a rat. Her teeth were closed so tight that Sneaky couldn't shake them
loose. Across the den Mother Wolf jerked him, snapping and snarling
and biting until poor Sneaky was terrified. Near the entrance she gave
him an extra bite with her sharp teeth, and said:

"Now go out and hunt for the family, and don't come home again until
you can behave yourself. I won't have you spoiling the tempers of my
children. Away with you!"

And Sneaky cowed and frightened trotted away, while Mother Wolf
returned to the den to calm the fears of her little ones. The next
story will tell of how Washer was brought up by the Wolves.

    [Illustration: ACROSS THE DEN MOTHER WOLF JERKED HIM]




STORY FIVE

SNEAKY VISITS BLACK WOLF


Washer was perfectly safe in the den of wolves after that. Sneaky did
not return for a long time, and when he did appear he was so meek and
crestfallen that he hardly dared to say a word. Mother Wolf lorded it
over him, and made him obey her every wish. She even made him take
Washer and the cubs outside to watch them play in front of the cave
while she took a rest.

Washer was a little alarmed at first, but Sneaky never so much as
raised a paw to hurt him. He was in deadly fear of Mother Wolf.

After a while Washer lost all of his natural fear of being killed, and
life became very different to him in the den. It was a pleasant enough
home after all, and he was so grateful to Mother Wolf that he couldn't
do enough to please her. She smiled at him when he ran to do little
errands for her, and patted him on his back. He grew more attentive to
her than were her own children.

The cubs were growing rapidly, and Washer soon saw they would be much
bigger and stronger than he in time; but they looked upon him as one
of the family, and always treated him in a friendly way. They began
calling him Little Brother, and Mother Wolf in time adopted this name.
It was much better than Little Stranger, for Washer was no longer a
stranger, and it seemed absurd to call him that.

Sneaky at first refused to use that name, and when alone with the
raccoon he would often call him "Brat" or "Scamp." Washer didn't mind
this, for he knew Sneaky didn't dare abuse him.

In time the cubs grew so strong and active that they had to spend most
of their time out of doors. They trotted around in the bushes,
exploring the woods further and further away from home. Sneaky and
Mother Wolf watched them with admiring eyes, and encouraged them in
this.

"They will have to learn to hunt for themselves some day," Mother Wolf
said, "and I hope they'll be good hunters."

"If they take after their father they certainly will be," replied
Sneaky, licking his chops with satisfaction.

Mother Wolf did not notice this remark, for she was looking at Washer.
"I wonder what kind of a hunter Little Brother will be," she added.
"Will he hunt like a Wolf or--or like a Raccoon?"

"Like a Raccoon," replied Sneaky. "Can a Wolf change his nature, or a
Raccoon be other than a Raccoon?"

Mother Wolf could not deny the truth of Sneaky's remarks, and she
sighed. Somehow she had grown greatly attached to Little Brother, and
she wanted him to grow up and be like her own children.

"He must be taught to hunt with the pack," she said suddenly. "He will
learn their ways, and do as they do. Yes, we must take him to the pack
and introduce him."

Now this seemed to be a good time for Sneaky to get even with Mother
Wolf for thwarting him in bringing up Washer. What would the others of
the pack say when she brought a Raccoon in place of a Wolf to be
entered as a member? He smiled in his superior sort of way, and nodded
his head.

"I think, my dear," he said, grinning, "you'd better leave Little
Brother home when we take our children to the pack. They'd laugh at
you, and maybe kill Little Brother."

Mother Wolf's eyes looked a little troubled. She hadn't foreseen this
difficulty, and it might be true that the other wolves would refuse to
receive Little Brother as a member. But she had grown so fond of
Washer that she was ready to stand up for him to the end.

"If they won't receive him," she replied, "they'll never get my
children. I'll not let them join the pack."

Sneaky was immediately angered by this threat, and in spite of his
fear of Mother Wolf he jumped to his feet and let out a growl. "You
don't dare do that!" he cried. "Our children must join the pack, and
you can't deny them. I'll see that they join. I'll take them myself."

"Don't get excited, Sneaky," interrupted his mate. "You can't take
them unless I consent."

This also was a law of the pack, and Sneaky was angrier than ever.
"Why do you always want to oppose me?" he cried. "The children are as
dear to me as they are to you, and I must have something to say about
their bringing up. They cannot hunt alone in the woods. If you don't
let them join I'll see Black Wolf, our leader. Yes, I'll see him at
once, and lay the whole matter before him."

Mother Wolf was a little troubled at this, and she tried to dissuade
him. "Wait until it's time to take them to the pack, Sneaky," she said
in a friendly way. "I wouldn't trouble Black Wolf now. He's very
busy, you know."

"No," growled Sneaky stubbornly, "I'll see him at once. I've given in
to you in everything, but now it's my turn to rule, I'll go to Black
Wolf tonight."

Sneaky could be very stubborn if he made up his mind, and Mother Wolf
saw that he was determined now to appeal to the leader of the pack
over her head. She sighed, but pretended not to care.

"All right, Sneaky," she replied meekly, "but see that you tell the
truth, and nothing but the truth."

"Trust me for that," was the grinning reply.

And that very night Sneaky trotted away through the dark woods to
where Black Wolf lived in a den by himself. Black Wolf was not only
the leader of the pack, but a big powerful creature with hair so long
and shaggy that no animal who tried to kill him could bite through it
to reach his flesh. He had eyes that could see through the blackest
night, and muscles that were like steel.

He received Sneaky with a growl of discontent, for he had traveled far
that day to settle another family dispute among his people, and he was
very tired and drowsy.

"What do you want, Sneaky?" he demanded fiercely. "Can't you see I'm
tired and sleepy?"

"Yes, Black Wolf, I know you've earned a good night's rest, but I
bring a gift to you," replied Sneaky, laying before the leader the leg
of a lamb he had stolen from a farm-house on his way.

"Thanks," replied Black Wolf, sniffing to see if it was fresh meat.
"I'll eat it in the morning."

He closed his eyes, and soon would have been snoring if Sneaky hadn't
continued. "I came to see you for another reason," he added. "I want
to lay a question before you. Is it against the law of the pack to
admit a Raccoon as a member?"

Black Wolf opened one eye, and said crossly: "Why do you want to
bother me with such a foolish question, Sneaky! I'm in no mood for
joking."

"This is no joke, Black Wolf. It's very serious. My mate has brought
up a Raccoon as one of her children, and now she intends to bring him
to the pack for admission. What message shall I carry back to her?"

Black Wolf snorted, and raised his head long enough to think. Then, in
a loud voice he added: "Go back and tell her that if she brings a
Raccoon to the pack we'll pounce upon him and eat him alive. Go and
tell her that I, Black Wolf, leader of the pack, has given his word."

"Thank you," replied Sneaky, bowing low, and crawling out of the den.
He had obtained just the message he wanted, and he couldn't hurry fast
enough to deliver it to Mother Wolf. In the next story we will see
what Mother Wolf thought of it.




STORY SIX

MOTHER WOLF DECIDES TO ADOPT WASHER


Sneaky returned home and entered the den with every appearance of
being greatly pleased with himself. He licked his chops, smiled at the
cubs, and said a pleasant word of of greeting to Mother Wolf. Indeed,
he was so polite and agreeable that Washer wondered if something had
happened to change his disposition for good; but Mother Wolf was not
at all deceived. She understood that Sneaky had some important news on
his mind that he was anxious to get off.

After a while, when the little ones were outside of the den playing,
she humored him with a smile, and said: "Why don't you tell me now,
Sneaky? You've been dying to get it off your mind. Now's a good time."

"What do you mean my dear?" he asked, opening one eye, and looking as
surprised and innocent as a baby.

"Don't put on that innocent air," protested his mate impatiently.
"I've lived long enough with you to know when important news is
bothering you. Now out with it!"

Sneaky yawned dreadfully long, and stretched his limbs in the most
deliberate manner. He knew that Mother Wolf was as impatient to hear
the news as he was to tell it. So he did not propose to humor her
right away.

"You surprise me, my dear," he said finally. "What news do you speak
of? I'm not a carrier of tales like Grayback the Weasel or Mr. Fox. I
wouldn't stoop to such things."

Mother Wolf laughed so hard that she had to hold her sides with both
front paws. There was no way to tease Sneaky equal to that of laughing
at his serious remarks. In a few minutes his face grew red and his
ears lay back, and all the innocent expression vanished from his eyes.

"I don't see anything to laugh at," he growled. "Why don't you tell me
what it is, and I'll join you if it's worth a laugh. It's very
ill-mannered of any one to laugh alone in company!"

"Yes, I suppose it is," replied Mother Wolf, wiping her eyes.
"But"--regarding him slyly out of the corner of her eyes--"I didn't
know you were company, Sneaky. Are you?"

"Never mind such foolish questions!" was the quick retort. "What were
you laughing at--_me_?"

"Why, no, Sneaky, not at you. I wouldn't do such a thing. But I was
laughing at what you had on your mind."

"What had I on my mind?"

"The news that Black Wolf sent to me."

Sneaky was a little taken back by this remark, for he hadn't mentioned
any message from Black Wolf.

"How do you know I've been to see Black Wolf?" he asked after a pause.

"You said you we're going. Didn't you expect me to believe you? Surely
you haven't begun fibbing to me at your time of life, have you,
Sneaky?"

"No, of course not," he stammered. "I didn't mean that. Yes, I've been
to see Black Wolf."

"And he sent a message with you for me?"

"Well, now that you speak of it I remember he did," replied Sneaky,
squatting down on his haunches.

"Then why didn't you say so at first?" snapped Mother Wolf. "Why did
you pretend surprise, and try to look so innocent? I knew all the time
you had a message for me, and it was because you were trying so hard
to look innocent that made me laugh. Sneaky, you're not a good actor.
I wouldn't try it again if I were you."

His pride was wounded at this denial of all talent for acting, and
Sneaky dropped his nose down between his paws and looked very
crestfallen. "I suppose," he grumbled, "you think you know so much you
could tell me what Black Wolf's message is."

Mother Wolf paused before him and looked silently into his eyes before
she spoke again. Then she nodded her head. "I think I could almost
guess it."

"Then it isn't necessary for me to tell you," replied Sneaky, thinking
he had cornered her this time.

"Black Wolf was very much surprised and disgusted when you told him I
was to bring Little Brother into the pack," she went on, ignoring his
remark, "and of course you didn't help matters any by telling my side
of the story. You didn't tell Black Wolf how I had brought Little
Brother up as my own child until I loved him as much as any of the
cubs. You didn't tell him that from the first you wanted to kill him,
and that you were anxious to get rid of him, and turn him loose in the
woods so the whole pack could hunt him. You didn't tell him that he
had been with us for so long that he was more Wolf than Raccoon, and
that his own people would not accept him, and if we abandoned him he
would be without any family or friends. Oh, no you didn't explain any
of these things to Black Wolf!"

"But, my dear, how could you expect me in a few minutes to tell all
that?" protested Sneaky. "Black Wolf was very tired and surly, and he
didn't want to talk to me at all. If I hadn't taken a present to him
he would have turned me out without listening."

Mother Wolf nodded. "I can quite understand that, Sneaky. He's
bothered to death by settling the quarrels of the pack. It's not all
pleasure in being a leader."

"I should think not. It's a terribly responsible position, and I know
if I were leader I'd have my time well occupied."

"Yes, I think you would. You wouldn't have time to be interfering with
home matters so much. It must be great to be the mate of the leader of
the pack."

Sneaky raised his head and flashed an angry glance at Mother Wolf, for
her words recalled something unpleasant to the memory. When a young
Wolf, with eyes always smiling and laughing, and hair long and curly
as the silk of the corn tassel, Mother Wolf was the envy of every
hunter of the pack, and Black Wolf had cast envious eyes upon her
before he had been chosen leader. Sneaky recalled also that he had
deceived Black Wolf by telling him one day that Mother Wolf had
promised to be his mate, although no such promise had then been made.
He wondered if Mother Wolf had ever found out his little deception,
and if Black Wolf suspected anything. This doubt had given him many
unpleasant moments.

His wandering thoughts were suddenly recalled to the present by Mother
Wolf. "Black Wolf told you," she said quietly, "that if I brought
Little Brother to the pack council he'd refuse to receive him as a
member. Isn't that what he said?"

"Yes," admited Sneaky, "and he said something more. If you bring
Little Brother before him, he'll order the whole pack to pounce on him
and kill him."

"He said that!" exclaimed Mother Wolf in alarm. "Black Wolf sent that
message to me."

"Yes," replied Sneaky, smiling. "Now if you love Little Brother you
will keep him away from the pack council. You'd better turn him loose
and let him return to his own people."

Mother Wolf was silent a moment. Then she raised her head, and said
defiantly: "No, I'll never do that. His own people would reject him.
I've brought him up, and I'll always be a mother to him unless he
turns against me, and even then I shall continue to love him."

She stopped before adding her final challenge. "And, listen, Sneaky, I
shall take him before the pack council, and if Black Wolf orders the
pack to pounce on him they'll have to fight me first."

Sneaky was so troubled by this that he had nothing to say. In the next
story Washer shows the cubs a trick.




STORY SEVEN

WASHER LEARNS HE IS NOT A WOLF


Washer the Raccoon had been hunting with his Wolf brothers in the
woods around their cave den. This was a part of their education.
Mother Wolf would take them for a walk some distance from the cave,
and teach them to pick up the scent of other animals on the wind.
Sometimes it would be Browny the Muskrat or Sleepy the Opossum and
again that of White Tail the Deer or Puma the Mountain Lion who had
wandered away from their natural haunts.

Whatever animal it was they scented, Mother Wolf would caution them to
follow it carefully, sneaking through the bushes with padded feet so
as not to break a twig. She herself would remain behind so that all
the responsibility of the hunt would be on her children.

In the early days of these lessons, Washer was the quickest to learn,
and the quickest to follow the scent. He was older than his Wolf
Brothers, and this accounted for his quickness. He could run faster
than any of them, although his legs were shorter, and could climb up
embankments and rocks without losing his foothold.

"Well done, Little Brother," Mother Wolf would say proudly when he had
out-distanced all his brothers. "Some day you will be a mighty hunter.
Who knows but you may be leader of the pack yet."

Now Mother Wolf loved the stray little orphan so much that she was
blind to many things that she should have thought of. For one thing no
raccoon was ever as large as a wolf, as strong, nor as fleet of foot.
It was because Washer had the start in life that he seemed bigger and
quicker of mind than her own children.

As the days and weeks passed, the Wolf cubs grew amazingly. They
caught up to Washer, and then surpassed him in size. Their legs grew
long and slender, and one day in a race Washer was left behind in
spite of all that he could do. It was the first race with the cubs he
had ever lost.

"Hi! What's the matter, Little Brother?" the cubs called to him.
"You're lazy today!"

"Yes, maybe I am," replied Washer, but he had an uneasy feeling that
it was something more than laziness. His shorter legs could go as fast
as his brother's, but they could not cover so much ground.

The next day it was the same. They had all started on a scamper for
the brook, with Washer in the lead at the beginning, but long before
they reached the water the raccoon was behind.

"Lazy again, Little Brother!" they laughed when he came up to them.

"No, I couldn't run any faster," Washer replied truthfully. "You've
got longer legs than mine, and I can't keep up with you."

"So they are longer," replied the cubs, looking at their own long
legs.

"And you have stronger teeth and jaws than I have," continued Washer.
"You grow much faster. I don't seem to grow at all any more."

"Oh, your time will come," they answered, not wishing to offend him.

They continued to play together as formerly, but Washer always had to
be given a head start in a race. Then one day another thing surprised
them. They were tearing at their food when Washer found that he could
no longer hold his own in this battle. The cubs had more powerful jaws
than he, and they jerked the food away from him and gobbled it up.

"I didn't get half my share," Washer grumbled.

"Why not? Can't you help yourself?"

Washer was silent. The truth was beginning to dawn upon him that he
was different from his brothers. They were fleeter of foot and
stronger of jaws. They could also jump longer distances, taking
gullies and ravines in leaps that carried them clear across. Washer
had to run around or climb down and then up the ravines.

"Little Brother, you can't keep up with us any more," the cubs said
one day more in sadness than in boastfulness. "How'll you join the
hunt with us when we become members of the pack?"

"Listen, brothers," Washer said, "I cannot run as fast as you, nor
fight as fiercely for my food, but there is one thing I can do that
will surprise you. I can go where none of you can follow."

They laughed at this challenge, and told him to show them the trick.
"We'll follow you," they said. "You can't lose us."

"All right! Follow me!"

Washer had found out that his sharp little claws were perfectly
adapted to tree climbing, and that his Wolf brothers could not get up
a tree higher than the lowest branches which they might reach by
jumping. He had tried climbing trees and found that it came as easy
to him as running.

There was a big cedar tree near the brook, and after looking up it he
started to climb the trunk. It was so easy for him that he went up it
almost as quickly as Bobby Gray Squirrel could. His Wolf brothers sat
down on their haunches in a circle around the tree and watched him in
amazement.

Washer reached the first branches, and ran out on one big one. "Look
out, Little Brother, or you'll fall!" they shouted. "Be careful!"

Washer smiled and showed his teeth. "Oh, this is nothing! I'll climb
to the top!"

He ran back to the trunk, and began climbing higher. Up and up he went
until his little body was lost among the foliage.

"He's lost!" exclaimed the Wolf cubs below. "Something's happened to
him! I can't see him!"

But Washer, having reached the top-most branch of the tree, bit off a
twig and threw it down at them. "Here I am!" he cried. "Now follow me
up here!"

The Wolf cubs immediately accepted the challenge. They started for the
tree and began pawing at it They jumped and leaped up the trunk, and
tried in every way to climb it. Their failure was so ludicrous that
Washer laughed heartily, encouraging them with loud words.

But no wolf can climb a tree, and the cubs soon stopped their efforts.
Once more they squatted around in a circle and looked up at Washer.

"Will you teach me to climb?" asked one after another.

Washer considered a moment, and then said: "It's something that can't
be taught brothers. If I could I would, but no wolf can ever climb a
tree."

They were so surprised and amazed at the exploit of their Little
Brother in climbing a tree that they surrounded him all the way home
and pestered him with all sorts of questions. When they reached the
den they demanded of Mother Wolf the reason why they could not climb a
tree like Little Brother. Mother Wolf was both sad and pleased.

"I can't tell you," she replied, "why a wolf cannot climb a tree. But
he simply can't any more than he can fly like a bird. Little Brother
is a Raccoon, you know, and--"

"What's a Raccoon? Isn't he a wolf?"

"No, dears, Little Brother isn't a wolf."

All the cubs looked in surprise at Washer. He was not like them. He
wasn't a Wolf. In the next story Washer finds one of his people treed
by the cubs.




STORY EIGHT

THE CUBS TREE A STRANGER


Thereafter there was a different feeling between the Wolf cubs and
Washer the Raccoon. The former could not help feeling that Washer was
an outsider, and while they tried to conceal their feelings they were
not entirely successful. He was not only not their real brother, but
he was a different kind of an animal--not a wolf at all.

One day when they were down by the brook, Washer plucked a rich, juicy
root to eat, for there had not been enough meat to go around that day,
and Washer was hungry.

"What are you going to do with that, Little Brother?" one of the cubs
asked, watching him carry the root away in his mouth.

"Why, eat it, of course," was the reply.

"What a funny thing to eat! I never ate a root before."

It was a fact that wolves never liked roots or leaves, while raccoons
frequently eat both. Washer felt a little embarrassed, but he carried
the root to the brook and dipped it in. The Wolf cubs followed him.

"What are you doing that for?" added another, as the raccoon
continued to dip the root in the water.

"Washing it, of course, before eating it," was the reply.

Once more there was surprise and curiosity on the faces of the cubs.
Washer had unintentionally betrayed a trick of all his ancestors. The
raccoons nearly always dipped and washed their food in water before
eating it. It was the most natural thing in the world for him to do
it, but it was not until he saw the look of wonder in the eyes of his
playmates that he realized this little act indicated once more what a
wide difference there was between them.

"Do all raccoons wash their food before eating it," continued one of
the cubs.

Washer nodded his head and began daintily chewing the soft root. The
cubs bit at the other end of it, but they saw nothing in it to appeal
to their taste.

"What funny creatures raccoons must be, Little Brother!"

Washer was a little annoyed and angered by this remark, for he was a
raccoon, and he wasn't going to have his people ridiculed.

"They climb trees," continued the speaker, "and wash their food before
eating it. Isn't it funny, brothers!"

They all set up a laugh, which increased Washer's anger. "They're no
funnier than Wolves," he blurted out suddenly. "You hunt in packs as
if afraid, and sneak upon your victims instead of fighting them face
to face. I thing that cowardly. Now raccoons don't do that."

"We didn't mean to offend you, Little Brother," replied the first cub,
seeing Washer's anger. "Next to being a wolf we'd rather be raccoons.
Yes, indeed!"

The others repeated this until Washer felt sorry for his show of
anger. Still he was quite sad, for he began to realize that he could
not always be with his little brothers. The day would come when he
would have to leave them. They were growing so big and so rough in
their play that many times he had to retire and look on. Then, too,
they were beginning to take long hunting trips through the woods, and
he could not keep up with them. Sneaky in particular took delight in
running him out of breath, and then laughing at him.

"Listen, Brothers," he said, turning sorrowfully upon them, "I am a
raccoon and you are wolves. Some day you will have to hunt without me.
Then I shall return to my own people, for it isn't right that a
raccoon should live with wolves. But I shall always have a tender
feeling for you in my heart, and shall always remember you."

"No we won't hunt without you," interrupted one of the cubs. "You
can't leave us. You're our Little Brother, and you'll always be that!"

Washer was greatly pleased by this show of affection for it made him
very sad to think of leaving the only home he had lived in since a
small baby; but right down in his heart he knew that he would some day
leave them and go back to his own people.

Washer had only a dim remembrance of his own real brothers. The
accident on the river when he was carried over the falls seemed so
long ago that it was more like a dream now than anything else. He
couldn't even remember what his mother looked like, and as for his
brothers they were only tiny baby raccoons then and now they had grown
up he would not recognize them.

A few days after this conversation, the Wolf cubs were playing near
the brook when one of them suddenly raised his nose in the air and
began sniffing. The others immediately stopped their play and sniffed
the air also.

"What is it?" asked Washer.

"I smell something good," replied the first wolf. "It's over this
way."

"Then we'll go around the other way and head him off," said another
cub.

Washer knew their method of hunting an animal they had once winded.
They would spread out in a wide circle, and creep upon him from all
directions. Sneaky had taught them this trick, and when they hunted
together in this way it was hard for anything to escape them. No
matter which way the hunted animal went he was pretty sure to run into
one of the pack.

Washer had caught the odor on the wind, but he was not sure just what
kind of an animal it came from. The smell seemed familiar, and yet he
could not place it. It annoyed and puzzled him. Was his memory growing
short?

He decided to follow the cubs in the chase and for a time he managed
to keep up with them; but when they finally caught sight of their prey
they broke from the cover of the bushes and ran in full tilt after
him. Washer was quickly left behind.

In a short time he could tell by their howls that they had run their
victim to earth. They were yelping and howling, but not entirely with
pleasure.

"What's the matter?" Washer asked himself. "Have they stalked Buster
the Bear or Loup the Lynx? I must hurry and see."

He ran as fast as his short legs would permit, and in a few minutes he
came out into an opening in the woods. In the center of this was a
small tree, around which the Wolf cubs were circling wildly, leaping
up as high as they could every now and then, but always falling short
of their mark.

Washer came up, panting and gasping; "What is it, Brothers?" he
called. "Where is it?"

"Up the tree!" shouted one of the cubs. "We can't reach him, but you
can Little Brother. You can climb the tree and drive him down. Now I
know we'll always need you when we go hunting. Hurry up and drive him
out of the tree!"

Washer saw a dark, fuzzy ball high among the branches of the small
tree. He could not make it out at first, but there was something
familiar about it, and the odor!--why, he knew that odor! He had
always known it!

But he stopped suddenly and glanced up at the pair of frightened eyes
looking down at the wolves. He gave a gasp and shudder. It was a
raccoon the cubs had treed--one of his own people. How could he betray
him to the greedy cubs, and if he didn't what would his wolf
brothers think of him? In the next story you will read about what
Washer did for the raccoon.

    [Illustration: IT WAS A RACCOON THE CUBS HAD TREED]




STORY NINE

WASHER SAVES ONE OF HIS OWN PEOPLE


When Washer discovered that it was one of his own people driven up the
tree by the wolves, he felt a queer sensation stealing over him. For
the first time he seemed to realize how cruel the Wolf cubs were in
their hunting, and how terrible the hunted must feel. It was almost as
if he was up that tree with a lot of wolves below howling for his
blood.

Something like anger and disgust for the cubs sprang up in his heart.
What right had they to chase every weaker animal in the woods and kill
him! Why couldn't they let other animals live in peace in the woods!

While he sat there thinking of these things, the young wolves were
leaping up at the treed raccoon and howling dismally every time they
fell short of reaching him. Finally one of the cubs turned to Washer.

"Why don't you go up the tree and drive him down?" he asked. "Hurry
up, Little Brother, for we're hungry. Go up and shake the branch, and
we'll catch him as he falls."

Washer began to tremble, not with fear, but because he knew he had to
save the raccoon in some way, and he couldn't think of any trick that
would do it. The cubs mistook his trembling for fear, and one of them
exclaimed:

"Little Brother's afraid to go up the tree! See, he's trembling all
over!"

"When was Little Brother afraid before?" asked another. "Surely he's
not afraid of that animal."

Washer saw that they had not recognized the animal up the tree as one
of his own people. They hardly knew a raccoon from any other animal.
This fact gave Washer new hope. He didn't want to betray to them his
feelings.

"Are you afraid, Little Brother?" added another, standing before him.
"I don't believe it."

"No, I'm not afraid," replied Washer finally, recovering from his
embarassment. "When was I afraid of anything! Have I not played and
fought with you all, and did you ever know me to beg for mercy? Then
why should I be afraid of that small animal?"

"I knew it, Little Brother," replied the last cub. "Now you'll go up
the tree and shake him down to us."

Washer rose to his feet and trotted away from the tree. "Come here,
Brothers," he called, "I want to talk to you, and we must not be
overheard. Now listen," he added, when they were at a safe distance
from the tree, "you've heard of Billy Porcupine, haven't you?"

"Billy Porcupine! Oh, you mean the animal with the prickly thorns!
Yes, we've heard of him."

Washer nodded his head. "Then you remember that Mother Wolf and Sneaky
always told you to beware of Billy Porcupine. If you didn't he'd run
his thorns in your nose, and it would take days and days for the
wounds to heal up."

"Yes, they told us that!" they exclaimed in unison. Then in little
frightened voices they added; "Is that Billy Porcupine up the tree?"

Washer did not answer directly, but he looked very wise. "Now, listen
again," he added, "there's only one thing to do. You must run back to
the den and tell Mother Wolf or Sneaky. They will know what to do.
I'll stay here and watch, and if Mother Wolf tells me to go up the
tree I'll go even if I get stuck full of quills."

The cubs were greatly impressed by these words, for they had heard
many tales of the wounds inflicted by Billy Porcupine's quills, and
they shuddered at the thought of getting them in their mouth and nose.

"I'll stay here with you, Little Brother," the oldest of the cubs
said. "If he comes down we'll corner him and hold him until Mother
Wolf comes."

"No you must go with your brothers," replied Washer. "I can watch him
alone. I'm not afraid of him."

"You're a brave Little Brother!" they exclaimed in a breath.

Washer urged them to hurry, and after a while they decided to race
back to the den and summon their parents. Washer promised to stand
guard under the tree until they returned.

Their great discovery excited the cubs, and they were anxious to see
how Mother Wolf or Sneaky would handle this strange animal that went
around in the woods armed with sharp quills. They disappeared in the
bushes, each anxious to beat all the others to the cave.

The moment they had gone, Washer ran back to the tree and looked up
it. The raccoon was still crouching there in a high branch. Washer
looked curiously at him, and then called:

"Raccoon! Little Raccoon, come down now, and run away. My wolf
brothers have gone, but they'll soon return. Run and hide in your
hole or find a bigger tree."

There was a noise in the branches overhead, and the raccoon crawled
down a few feet. Washer looked at him, and then retreated a step or
two. It was not a little raccoon, but a big one, with sharp claws and
fine, white teeth. He was so much bigger than Washer that he felt a
little awe of him.

"Why do you call the wolves your brothers?" the raccoon asked. "You're
a raccoon, aren't you? Then the wolves can't be your brothers. They're
the enemies of my people."

Washer looked a little embarrassed. "Yes, I'm a raccoon," he replied,
"but the wolves saved me, and Mother Wolf brought me up as one of her
own. I've always lived with her in her den. She's been kind to me, and
I love her."

The big raccoon showed his teeth and crawled down another branch. "You
love a wolf!" he said angrily. "Then you're a traitor to your own
people!"

Washer was greatly surprised and distressed by this remark. "No, I'm
not a traitor. Because I love Mother Wolf for what she's done for me
isn't any reason why I shouldn't love my own people."

"I hear them coming back!" snapped the raccoon in the tree. "I must
be off or they'll catch me. This tree is too small. I'll find a bigger
one."

"Yes, do hurry! I hear them howling now. They'll be here soon."

The big raccoon dropped to the ground and stood by the side of Washer.
He was so much bigger that Washer felt like a baby alongside of him.
He was a fierce old creature, too, for he kept gnashing his teeth and
switching his tail.

"Well, aren't you coming with me?" he asked. "If you know the woods
you might lead me to a good hiding place."

"No, I can't go with you," replied Washer a little sadly. "I must wait
for my brothers and Mother Wolf. They're all the friends I have."

"The wolves are your friends?" snapped the big raccoon. "Then you're a
traitor to your people! I believe this is only a trick to deceive me.
I'll teach you to betray us!"

Before Washer realized what he meant, the big fellow leaped toward him
and bit him two or three times on the body and front paws. Then with a
grunt of delight, he ran away and disappeared in the woods. Frightened
by this sudden attack by one of his own people, Washer gave a squeal
of pain and dropped down on the ground bleeding. Just then the wolves
broke through the bushes and came racing toward the tree, with Sneaky
in the lead.

In the next story Washer confesses to Mother Wolf, and she decides to
take him to the council rock to meet Black Wolf.




STORY TEN

MOTHER WOLF LISTENS TO WASHER'S STORY


Mother Wolf was close behind, but Sneaky reached Washer's side first.
There was a suspicious leer on his face, but the sight of the blood on
the raccoon's body seemed to puzzle him. He stopped and glanced up at
the tree.

"Where's Billy Porcupine?" he asked. "I don't see him in the tree."

"He ran down and escaped," replied Washer. "I couldn't stop him."

Sneaky licked his chops, and added: "Quite likely!" He sniffed among
the lower branches of the tree. "If my nose doesn't deceive me there's
been no porcupine around here. No, sir; nothing but raccoons."

He turned and smiled at Mother Wolf and the youngsters. He felt quite
proud of his spying quality. "I smell nothing but raccoon up that
tree," he added. "Therefore, it was a raccoon, and not a porcupine,
that you treed."

"But little brother said it was Billy the Porcupine," interrupted one
of the cubs.

"How'd Little Brother know it was a porcupine?" asked Sneaky. "When
did you ever see one?"

Now Washer was feeling very miserable, first, because his wounds hurt
him, and second because one of his own people had turned on him and
attacked him after he had saved his life. So he spoke without
thinking. "I don't know," he stammered. "Maybe I never saw one."

"Ah! ha!" scoffed Sneaky. "I thought so. It was only a trick to
deceive us. I see now what it means."

He turned to the tree again, and looked up it, and began sniffing at
the trunk and limbs. "Nothing but raccoon odor," he added. "No
porcupine has been here."

"For goodness sake," interrupted Mother Wolf, wiping the blood from
Washer's face, "what are you wasting your time about? Why don't you
help Little Brother? He's all bloody, and we must help him home."

"Ah, bloody! So he is! Then if it was Billy the Porcupine we should
find quills sticking in him."

He examined Washer's wounds a little roughly, smiling all the time. Of
course, there were no porcupine quills, and this seemed to please
Sneaky immensely.

"Just as I thought," he said finally. "There are no quills.
Therefore, there was no porcupine here. Then why did Little Brother
deceive you?"

He turned to the cubs, who were watching him curiously.

"I'll tell you, my children," he continued. "It was a raccoon you had
treed--one of Little Brother's own people. He knew it all the time,
and he didn't want you to have him for your dinner. So he told you
this little story about a porcupine, and sent you home to call us
while his friend could escape in the woods. See, he's gone. There's
nothing up the tree."

They followed the direction of his pointing nose. The tree was empty.
Then they turned their eyes toward Washer.

"Can you deny that, Little Brother?" Sneaky added in a beguiling
voice. "Of course you can't."

"But how'd he get hurt?" asked one of the cubs. "See, he's bleeding
all over."

Mother Wolf interfered at this moment. "Sneaky, you run down to the
brook and get some water," she commanded. "If Little Brother didn't
meet a porcupine, he ran into something just as bad. We won't stop to
discuss that now. Hurry up with that water!"

Sneaky dropped his tail between his legs and started for the brook,
but half way there he stopped and said: "It wasn't a porcupine, I
know that. Therefore, it was a raccoon. Little Brother deceived my
children to save his life. No wolf will stand for that. He's not a
friend of my people. I'll tell Black Wolf that."

Mother Wolf, who had been busy cleaning the blood from Washer's fur,
looked a little disturbed. Sneaky had another argument against
admitting Washer to the wolf pack.

"Little Brother," she whispered, "it is true what Sneaky says? Was
Billy Porcupine up that tree?"

Washer could not deceive Mother Wolf. She had been too kind to him.
"No," he answered, "it was a raccoon, and I couldn't bear to see him
killed. He belonged to my own people."

Mother Wolf nodded her head, showing that she understood his feelings.
"But these wounds," she added, a little puzzled. "How did you get
them?"

Washer was greatly distressed at this question. If he told the truth,
he would have to condemn one of his own people of ingratitude, but
even that was better than deceiving Mother Wolf.

"It was the raccoon," he answered after a pause. "When he came down
the tree he bit me. He thought I belonged to the wolf pack, and he
called me a traitor. I don't suppose he understood."

"He didn't deserve the kindness you showed him," was the quick retort.
"If he was near here I'd send the children and Sneaky after him. He
deserves punishment. Do you know where he's hiding?"

"No! He ran away in the woods and that was the last I saw of him."

Mother Wolf had such confidence in Washer that she did not doubt his
word. She knew that Little Brother would not deceive her to protect
one of his own people.

"Well, I'm glad he isn't here," she added, sighing. "Sneaky would hunt
him down, and I don't suppose you'd like to see him killed, even if he
did bite you."

"No, I don't wish him harm."

Washer's voice was a little trembly, and a tear stood in one of his
eyes. "What is it," asked Mother Wolf sympathetically, "that makes you
so sad, Little Brother? Do your wounds hurt you so much?"

"No, I was thinking of my people," replied Washer. "They won't have
me. They'll turn against me because I was brought up in a wolf's den,
and your people won't have me. I'm an outcast--without a home or
people."

"Don't say that," whispered Mother Wolf. "You're my adopted child, and
I shall always look after you. My people will have to take you. If
they don't--"

Her eyes flashed, and Washer knew that she was prepared to fight for
him. But he had no desire to bring trouble to her, and he said: "No,
no, don't do that. Let me go away in the woods. I'm old enough now to
make a living. You must not introduce me to the pack. I shall always
remember you and my Wolf Brothers, but no good can come of trying to
make me a wolf. I'm only a raccoon."

"Little Brother, don't talk like that. I'm going to take you tomorrow
to the council, and Black Wolf shall listen to me. My people must
protect you. If Black Wolf says so none of them will dare harm you.
Come now, and don't feel sad any more."

Washer tried to dry his eyes and look cheerful, but it was not very
easy to do this. His own people had denied him, and he dreaded
appearing before the wolf pack. He knew that Sneaky would condemn him,
and try to drive him away, and the very thought of Black Wolf made him
shudder. What kind of a leader was he, and would he listen to Mother
Wolf's pleadings? In the next story you will read of how Mother Wolf
took him to the council and pleaded with and defied the leader of the
wolf pack.




STORY ELEVEN

WASHER IS INTRODUCED TO THE WOLF PACK


Washer was taken with the cubs the following night to the wolf council
where they were to be introduced to the pack and formally admitted as
members. All young wolves when they reach the hunting age had to be
introduced by their parents, and the leader of the pack then announced
their acceptance and gave to each a name. Until that time they were
simply cubs, unfit to hunt with the older wolves.

The council was held in the deepest, thickest part of the woods where
no wild animal or hunter would be likely to disturb them. Once a month
in the full of the moon the pack assembled around a big flat rock
overlooking a pool of water. Here they waited until Black Wolf, their
leader, came and called the council to order.

Mother Wolf was anxious to get to the council early, and she started
her family off long before moon was up above the tops of the trees.
Sneaky led the way, with the cubs filing behind him, and Mother Wolf
bringing up the rear.

They were so early that they met none of the other wolves on the way,
and Mother Wolf gave a sigh of relief when she found no one ahead of
her. She drew up her little circle of young ones in the shadow of a
clump of birches on the right of the council rock, and then dropped
down to rest.

All was quiet in the woods. Not even Hoot the Owl or Whip-Poor-Will
was abroad to disturb the silence of the great woods. Occasionally a
shadow drifted across the flat rock, and a wolf would take his place
in front or on one side of it. The moon rose slowly until it cast a
flood of white light upon the top of the rock. Almost at the same
moment there was a howl nearby, and out of the thickets sprang Black
Wolf, the leader. He stood a moment looking at the crouching pack, and
then he leaped to the top of the council rock. The whole pack rose as
one and gave vent to their hunting cry.

This was their way of recognizing their leader. Black Wolf stood a
moment, a tall, gaunt, powerful creature, in the white moonlight, as
if challenging any opposition, and then he dropped down with his front
paws curled under him.

"The council is open," he announced. "Has any one a message for the
pack? We're all here."

Sneaky rose from his position near Mother Wolf, and trotted in front
of the rock. "O Black Wolf, noble leader of the pack," he began, "I
bring my cubs for your inspection. May they please you, and prove
worthy of their sire."

"Bring them forth!" replied Black Wolf. "They should be good cubs if
they take after you, Sneaky."

The different members of the pack craned their heads forward to see
Sneaky's cubs, which, at the bidding of their parent, filed out in a
row and stood before the council rock. Black Wolf surveyed them in
silence, inspecting them with his fierce dark eyes.

"You have done well by the pack, Sneaky," he announced finally. "I
name the first one Curly because his beautiful fur curls backward at
the tips. The second one shall be known as Spotted Wolf, for I see
gray spots under his neck. And the last one shall be known as Tiger
Wolf because of the fierceness of his eyes. I have named them, and so
shall they be known to the pack."

He stopped and looked hard at Sneaky, as if expecting him to say more;
but Sneaky was pleased with his presentation, and backed slowly away.

"Is there any more, Sneaky?" the leader asked.

Before Sneaky could reply, a tall, gaunt figure of a wolf rose from
the shadows of the birch trees. It was Mother Wolf. She was going to
speak for her foster child, and not let Sneaky introduce him. She
trotted to the front, and swung around to face the pack an instant,
and then turned to the council rock again.

"O Black Wolf, mighty leader of our pack," she began, "I have another
child, which I have nursed and brought up in my den, and I wish to
admit him to the pack. A foster child brought to me one day by Sneaky.
I have cared for him and loved him as my own. I have taught him the
ways of our people, and with us he must hunt, for his own people have
cast him out."

All the wolves pricked up their ears at this strange announcement, and
Black Wolf half rose from his sitting attitude; but his eyes had
narrowed and darkened, for he knew from what Sneaky had told him that
this thing might occur.

"O Mother Wolf, you have spoken well, but we must see this foster
child of yours," he said. "Is he a wolf cub from another pack?"

"What matters it if he's from another pack or no pack at all?" replied
Mother Wolf. "A mother's love is great enough to take to herself any
child that is homeless and friendless. Is it not on record that long
ago a Mother Wolf nursed and brought up a man child, giving to him as
much as she gave to her own offspring? Then, if she can adopt a man
child, why can she not take the offspring of any other animal of the
woods--of Puma the Mountain Lion, for instance, or--"

"Puma's offspring would bring disaster to us if we adopted him,"
replied Black Wolf hastily, and the others shuddered at the mere
mention of Puma's name. "No, we could never admit a Puma as a member
of the hunting pack."

"No! No!" cried many voices.

They jumped to their feet, ready to enforce their protest by actions.
A young Puma would stand little chance in that company of angry
wolves.

"It is not Puma's offspring," replied Mother Wolf, smiling. "I could
never learn to love anything that came out of Puma's den."

"What animal is it then? Where is this foster child?" several cried.

"You hear them," added Black Wolf. "What have you to say? Where is
this one you plead for?"

"He is yonder in the shadow of the birches. I shall call him out if
you'll give him protection. If not--"

"He shall be protected," interrupted the leader. "It is the law of the
council."

Mother Wolf turned her head ever so slightly, and called: "Little
Brother, come here!"

Washer, with his heart beating fast, but confident that Mother Wolf
would protect him, emerged slowly from the shadows and trotted toward
her. At first the wolves could see nothing, so small was he, and then
they could make out only a shadow that seemed to drift between them
and the woods. But when Washer reached the foot of the council rock,
the bright moonlight fell full upon him.

"Here is my foster child!" exclaimed Mother Wolf proudly. "And my love
for him is as great as for my own cubs. He is as wise as they, as
brave, and as quick-witted. Look at him, and accept him."

Black Wolf rose to his feet and stared down at Washer. All the other
wolves leaped to their feet and closed in to get a better view. Then
suddenly, before their leader could speak, a howl of derision went up
from a score of throats.

"A raccoon!" they shouted in merriment. "A raccoon! And he wishes to
hunt with the pack!"

For a moment the gale of merriment was so great that no one could be
heard. Black Wolf tried to preserve order and his own dignity. Washer
felt suddenly abashed and frightened, and wished there was a tree near
that he could climb. In the next story the wolf pack try to kill
Washer, but Mother Wolf comes to the rescue.




STORY TWELVE

BLACK WOLF DEFIES THE PACK


Mother Wolf was even more annoyed and dismayed than Washer by the
sudden outbreak of merriment when the pack caught sight of the raccoon
standing before the council rock. Sneaky, from a position behind
apparently enjoyed the embarrassment of his mate, for a broad grin
spread over his face and he chuckled with the others. The young cubs
stood by their father, but as the scene was a little puzzling to them
they remained silent and motionless.

"Give me the raccoon for my hunting companion!" shouted a big gray
wolf. "I won't go far then for my dinner!"

The others began crowding around the council rock. "No! No! We want
him!" they cried. "Turn him over to the pack!"

Mother Wolf swung around and faced the circle of wolves, displaying
her teeth and growling angrily.

Black Wolf arose to his hind legs and let out a roar that brought the
whole pack to its senses. The cries stopped, and every member slunk
back to his position. The big leader glared hard at them and waited a
full minute to see if any dared oppose his authority.

Then he turned slowly to Sneaky, and said: "Sneaky, do you bring this
raccoon as your foster child?"

"No, O mighty leader, he is none of mine," was the prompt reply. "I
brought him to my den for food one day after I'd fished him out of the
river. I wanted to kill him for the children, but Mother Wolf
protested. I had nothing to do with his rearing. He would have died
long ago if I'd had my way."

The members of the pack nodded their heads, and Black Wolf turned to
Mother Wolf. He looked at her in silence for some time. Then, in a low
voice, he said: "No foster child can hunt with the pack unless he's a
wolf. It's against the law of the woods. If we permitted it Puma the
Mountain Lion would be filling our homes with his young so they might
grow up with us and destroy us. And Loup the Lynx would do the same so
that he could betray our hiding places. There would be no safety for
us after that."

"But Little Brother is a raccoon," pleaded Mother Wolf. "Surely you're
not afraid of the raccoons. They could not hurt us nor betray us."

The whole pack sniffed in disgust at the idea of the raccoon tribe
hurting the wolves.

"That is true, O Mother Wolf," replied Black Wolf, "but if we let you
introduce a raccoon as a foster child, we could not prevent another
bringing a young Puma or Lynx. We must obey the laws of our tribe, and
keep from it all other animals."

A great sadness settled on Mother Wolf's face. She looked down at
Washer and began licking his head. She knew that Black Wolf's words
were law, and she could not defy them.

"Then must I give up my foster child?" she asked.

"No," replied the leader, "you can take him home and keep him, but he
is not under the protection of the pack. If they hunt him down and
kill him you can blame no one. I cannot interfere."

There was a murmur of applause, and every wolf began licking his lips
as if in anticipation of the feast ahead. The sight of their cruel
greediness aroused Mother Wolf. She raised her head proudly, and said:

"They will not dare touch him in my cave--not one of them! I shall
protect him!"

There was an ugly, defiant look in the eyes which made more than one
wolf cower and slink back out of sight. Mother Wolf was a big, gaunt,
powerful creature, and no one cared to measure his strength with her
when she was defending her young.

"The council is ended then?" she added, turning to the leader. "You
refuse to accept Little Brother in the pack?"

"It is so decided, Mother Wolf. And the law cannot be changed."

"Then I shall go home. Come, Little Brother, we must start at once
before the moon grows dark. It is a long way, but--"

"One moment!" cried a big gray wolf. "Does the law of the woods give
us the right to hunt for our food now? We're hungry, and if the
council has ended we may begin the hunt at once. Is it not true, O
Black Wolf?"

Now the leader and Mother Wolf both understood the meaning of this
challenge. The pack wanted to pounce upon Washer at once and devour
him before he could ever reach the cave. Even Washer knew what was
coming, and a great trembling seized him. He looked around him, but
there was no tree near the council rock, and the whole pack stood
between him and the woods. He had no chance to escape them.

Black Wolf seemed troubled by the gray wolf's questions, for he knew
that he had no authority to change the law. Once his decision was
given there was nothing more for him to do. The whole pack had a
right to fall upon Washer and kill him in sight of Mother Wolf. It was
a dangerous situation.

But Mother Wolf suddenly changed her attitude. She backed up against
the council rock, with Washer behind her, and bared her white teeth to
the pack. The hair stood up straight on her head, and the bushy tail
began swishing slowly back and forth. The yellow eyes were so luminous
in the moonlight that they seemed to shoot sparks of fire.

"If you're hungry," she growled, "and want to eat Little Brother, you
must do so over my dead body. Not one of you shall touch him until
you've felt the sting of my teeth. Come on now, Gray Wolf, and I'll
show you what mother love can do to save her young!"

Gray Wolf hesitated, backing off a little, for Mother Wolf was a
powerful antagonist. Alone he could not overcome her. Indeed, in her
present frame of mind, she could probably whip two or three ordinary
wolves. She was crouching for the spring, with dripping jaws snapping
defiantly.

"Why should we be defied by one wolf!" cried the big gray fellow. "We
must have the raccoon. Close in on him on all sides. Sneaky, you lead
on that side, and I'll do the same here."

Mother Wolf cast a look at Sneaky that made him hesitate, but at the
same time the wolves on the outside of the circle began crowding in.
They pushed and shoved until the circle was narrowed. Those in the
front came within a few feet of Mother Wolf.

With a growl she snapped at the nearest and caught him by the front
paw. With a howl of pain, the wolf leaped over the backs of the others
and disappeared in the woods. Mother Wolf sprang at another and sunk
her sharp teeth in his neck.

But in spite of all this the circle was growing smaller. The pack was
clamoring for the blood of Washer, and it was only a question of time
before they would overcome Mother Wolf. She could not hope to fight
off the whole pack. She seemed to realize this, but she was determined
to die in the defense of her foster child.

"Close in!" cried Gray Wolf. "Come on, Sneaky, do your part, or we'll
believe you love the raccoon too."

Now the battle would have ended shortly if something hadn't happened
to surprise all. With a roar of rage and challenge, Black Wolf leaped
from the top of the rock and landed by the side of Mother Wolf. Facing
the pack, he cried:

"Not as your leader, but as one fighting for fair play, I shall defend
Mother Wolf. The first one that touches her shall pay with his life.
Back now, or fight me!"

There was a moment of silence; then a low murmur of voices as the
circle broke and fell back, leaving only Gray Wolf and Sneaky in the
front. Finding themselves deserted by the pack, they quickly ran, too,
and disappeared in the woods. In the next story Mother Wolf takes
Washer to the Silver Birch grove where his people live.




STORY THIRTEEN

WASHER GOES TO THE SILVER BIRCH GROVE


Black Wolf's unexpected defense of Mother Wolf and Washer saved them
from what might have been sure death to the latter and serious injury
to the former. None of the pack dared to offer battle to their leader,
and the moment he sided with Mother Wolf they broke ranks and ran off
into the woods.

When they were gone, Mother Wolf turned gratefully to the big leader,
and said: "You have saved my life, Black Wolf. What can I do to repay
you?"

"Hurry home with your foster child, Mother Wolf, before the pack
changes its mind and returns. I will accompany you."

More than ever grateful now for seeing that she got back to her den in
safety, Mother Wolf led the way through the woods, with Washer close
behind her, and the leader of the pack bringing up the rear. Silently
and noiselessly they stole single file through the woods, with eyes
and ears alert to catch any unusual sound.

But nothing happened on the way. They reached the cave in safety,
where Black Wolf stopped. "I'll not go in," he said. "Now you're home
you'll know how to defend yourself."

"Yes, I can defend my home," she replied. "I'll not need any help now.
Thank you a thousand times for helping me."

"I did it, Mother Wolf," replied the leader, "because I remember how
we used to play together when young, and because I wanted to see
justice done. But now that you've got your foster child home, what are
you going to do with him? He can't hunt with the pack, and not being
under their protection they will hunt him down and kill him. Wherever
he goes they will follow. You can't always stay in the den watching
him. You must hunt with the pack at times to get your share of food.
If you stay here alone you'll starve."

Mother Wolf looked troubled, and said nothing. She knew how true Black
Wolf's words were, and she had not taken them lightly. When he finally
left her, she walked into the cave with Washer by her side. It was
empty. Sneaky and the cubs had not yet returned.

"They're out hunting, and won't return until morning," she said. "Now,
Little Brother, we can find some rest."

But Washer was not anxious for rest--not in the Wolf's den. He felt
that the nights adventure had broken up his old home. There could no
longer be any ties to hold him to it. In time the cubs would side with
pack and turn upon him.

"I can never stay here," he said suddenly. "If I do I'm in constant
danger, and you, too, will be in trouble. The whole pack will turn
against you. I must leave."

"But where can you go, Little Brother?" asked Mother Wolf anxiously.

"I must return to my own people."

"But they won't have you. Didn't you say one of them bit you and
threatened your life?"

"Yes, but he didn't know me. I must find one of my real brothers, and
he will understand."

Mother Wolf sat down and considered. After a while she got up and
paced back and forth in the den. "Maybe you're right," she said
finally, stopping before him. "There would be nothing but danger here
for you, and in time my own children would drive you out and perhaps
kill you. Yes, it's better that you should return to your own people.
But if they won't have you, I'll still protect you."

Washer rose excitedly to his feet. "Then I must go at once--before the
cubs and Sneaky return. They must find me gone, and if you don't tell
them where I am they'll never know."

"That's true, Little Brother. But where shall we go tonight?"

"To the Silver Birch grove where my people live. It's above the falls
where I fell in the water. Take me there, and I'll watch and wait for
them."

"But suppose some of the wolves found you in the Silver Birch Grove?"

"What matter's that?" laughed Washer. "I can climb a tree which is
more than any of the wolves can do. I'll go up the biggest tree, and
laugh at them."

"Yes, Little Brother, you can do that. I'd forgotten that your people
are tree climbers. Well," sighing heavily, "it's the only thing to do,
but it makes me sad to lose you. I shall mourn you every day you're
away."

"Not more than if you saw me killed by your own people," added Washer,
smiling up into her face.

She nodded her head and began licking his fur. In a short time she was
ready to accompany him to the grove of Silver Birches. This was some
distance from the cave, and they had to be wary in their movements,
for the whole wolf pack was abroad on the hunt. They heard their
distant howls on the clear night air, but by keeping away from them
they soon got beyond their echo.

They trotted along through the moonlight, following the river toward
the falls. Just below them they stopped, while Washer pointed out
where Sneaky had found him when he jumped ashore from his raft.

"That must have been a terrible adventure, Little Brother," Mother
Wolf said. "I never heard of any animal coming over the falls and
living. It must be you have a charmed life."

"If so it's because I've had such a good foster mother," replied
Washer. "You saved me from Sneaky, and tonight you saved me from the
pack. You're as brave as you are kind and loving. I shall never forget
you."

Mother Wolf was greatly affected by these words, and she showed her
gratitude in her eyes. Once more she slicked down the soft fur of her
foster child and murmured gentle words of love. Then they started off
once more on their journey.

They climbed the steep rocks that led to the upper part of the falls,
and once on their summit they headed directly for the grove of Silver
Birches. In the soft moonlight the birches glistened and shone like
twinkling stars, the leaves showing white and silvery. It was almost
like a fairy scene, and Washer raised his head in delight. He was
near his original home, in the land of his own people, and his little
heart beat with excitement.

What would his own people do? Would they receive him or drive him
away? The very thought of this made him shiver. He would then be
without a home or country of his own. He would be an outcast, which is
the worst thing that can be said of man or animal.

"I shall wait here in this big birch until some of my people appear,"
Washer said when they stole silently under the shadow of the grove. "I
am safe here. I shall climb up in that crotch and sleep until morning.
No wolf can get me."

"No, not even Black Wolf could reach you up there. None of my people
could jump that high. Are you quite sure you can climb that high?"

"I'll show you," laughed Washer. "You never saw me climb a tree
before."

He wanted to show her how well he could run up the tree, and he was
proud of his accomplishment when she watched him in silence, and then
said: "Wonderful, Little Brother! I wish my cubs could do as well.
Now, if you're safe I'll go. Good-bye!"

Washer waved a paw to her until she had disappeared from sight, and
then with a sigh of contentment he curled up in a round ball and went
to sleep. He was very tired after the night's adventure, and was glad
to get a few hours of sleep before morning dawned. He was safe from
the wolves. In the morning he would see if he was safe among his own
people. In the next story Washer meets an enemy that can climb trees.

    [Illustration: WASHER WAVED A PAW AT HER]




STORY FOURTEEN

WASHER IS TREED BY STRANGERS


Now Washer had not been sleeping long, although it seemed a great
while to him, when a peculiar rustling noise below awakened him. With
one eye still closed, and the other only half opened, he called
sleepily:

"Is that you, Mother Wolf?"

There was no answer, and Washer opened both eyes. If it was Mother
Wolf who had made the rustling sound, she would have answered his
question immediately. Washer concluded that it was somebody else. Then
he thought of the cubs. It would be like them not to answer, but try
to steal upon him to give him a fright.

"I know you're down there, Brothers," he added. "You can't frighten
me. I'm up the tree, and no wolf can climb up here."

There was still no response, and the silence of the woods suddenly
made Washer a little afraid. He became wide awake. He remembered now
what had happened to him; how he had been rejected by the wolves, and
how Mother Wolf had brought him to the grove of Silver Birches to find
his own people.

He also remembered that the wolf pack had declared they would hunt him
down and kill him. They were thirsting for his blood, and now that
Mother Wolf had left him they had followed his tracks and treed him.

Yes, down below there were undoubtedly many of the wolves--the whole
pack for all he knew--and the moment he came down they would pounce
upon him. Washer shivered, and crawled to a higher crotch. The moon
had gone down, and the woods were wrapped in darkness. It was
impossible for him to see anything below; but the thought that wolves
could not climb trees brought a sense of security. He was safe there
from Sneaky, Gray Wolf and the whole pack.

He waited a long time for a repetition of the noise, and then decided
that he would resume his sleep. If the wolves couldn't climb the tree
what was the use of worrying about them? He closed his eyes with a
sigh of relief.

Then came the rustling noise again--this time much nearer the trunk of
the tree. It came nearer, and finally reached the tree itself. There
was a slight jar that made the leaves tremble. Washer thought it was a
wolf leaping up, trying to reach the lower branches; but it was
followed by a steady rustling, scraping noise that puzzled him.

For a long time he was uncertain what to make of it, but when it came
nearer and nearer, and finally seemed to be in the tree itself, he
grew terribly frightened. Somebody or something was climbing the tree!

When Washer made this discovery his alarm was genuine. With a little
squeak of fear he ran to the top branch of the tree. But the scraping,
rustling noise followed him. It first came from the lower branches;
then from the middle ones, and now it was approaching the top.

Washer strained his eyes in the darkness to see this unknown creature
that was slowly crawling toward him. In time he could make out a dark
form; then another and another. There were three creatures climbing
the tree!

Washer's terror reached a climax. He ran so far out on a branch that
it threatened to break with him. He was panic-stricken! It would not
have been at all surprising if he had lost his hold and fallen to the
ground below. There was no other tree near enough for him to reach,
and it was either a matter of holding on and fighting his enemies up
there among the top-most branches or dropping to the ground thirty
feet below.

"Who is that?" he demanded between chattering teeth.

Then in a little panicky voice he added: "If you don't get away I'll
call Mother Wolf, and she'll eat you up."

That threat had the effect of loosening the tongue of one of the
animals, for a voice said in a low growl: "Hear him! Didn't I tell you
he was a friend of the wolves? Now he's going to call them to kill us.
But wolves can't climb trees. Come on, we'll catch him! He can't get
away!"

Now Washer recognized that voice at once. It was that of
the raccoon he had saved from the cubs, and who in return for his
kindness had bitten him. In some way he had discovered Washer's
presence in the tree, and had summoned his friends to kill him. For a
moment Washer was more afraid of his own people than of the wolves.
Then he decided he would make matters plain to them.

"Please don't come any further," he said in a shaking voice. "You just
listen to me. I'm not going to hurt you."

"Listen to that!" sniffed the big raccoon. "He promises not to hurt
us. Well, I don't think we'll give him a chance. But we'll hurt you."

"But why do you want to hurt me?" asked Washer.

"Because you're a friend of the wolves, and you're sent here to betray
us to them. We saw you come in the grove of Silver Birches with a big
wolf, and then say farewell to her. We knew it was all a trap. You
nearly had me killed that day when--"

"No, no," interrupted Washer, "I saved your life when the cubs had you
treed. If it hadn't been for me they'd caught you."

"No wolf can catch me when I'm up a tree," growled the raccoon.

"No, but they would have watched and waited at the foot of the tree
until you were starved out," replied Washer. "You don't know how
patient a wolf can be."

"I don't, eh?" snapped the raccoon. "I was treed by one once, and he
kept me there for nearly a week, but he got hungry before I did and
went away."

"What are you going to do to me?" Washer asked more interested in this
question than what happened to the big raccoon one day.

"We're going to punish you, and then drive you back to your
friends--the wolves."

"The wolves are not my friends any more," pleaded Washer.

"Wasn't that wolf who came here with you a friend?"

"Why, yes, that was Mother Wolf," stammered Washer.

"What did I tell you?" cried the big raccoon. "He admits it. If you're
a friend of a wolf you're the enemy to all raccoons."

"No!" interrupted Washer. "Let me explain!"

"Now we've got him!" interrupted the raccoon, who had been creeping
nearer. "Shake him off the branch! If the fall doesn't kill him our
people will catch him. He can't escape."

The three raccoons sprang toward the swaying branch and began shaking
it. Washer clung to it desperately, and it was impossible to dislodge
him.

"Bite it! Gnaw it off!" cried the leader of the raccoons.

To Washer's horror, they began biting and gnawing at the branch, which
soon sagged lower and lower. It snapped under his weight and the next
moment broke off close to the trunk. Washer felt himself going down,
down, down!

He let out a little squeak of fear as he felt himself falling through
space. His head struck a lower branch, and his feet got entangled in
a few small twigs, but they could not check his fall. He went down,
down, down until he landed with a loud plump on the soft earth. When
he got up to run he found himself surrounded by a circle of raccoons,
each one swishing his tail and gnashing his teeth. In the next story
Washer saves his people from a terrible death.




STORY FIFTEEN

THE CUBS LISTEN TO WASHER'S PLEA


Washer was severely bruised by his fall from the tree, but fortunately
no bones were broken. He limped a little, and felt a peculiar
sensation in one of his front paws; but these small pains were nothing
to the fear that possessed him when he saw the angry circle of
raccoons.

They were facing him on all sides so there was no chance for him to
escape. He turned around several times to find an opening, but his
only hope was to jump over the backs of his enemies, which was
something he felt unequal to. Even so they would catch him, for he
could not expect to jump higher in the air than the others.

He felt the best way out of the difficulty was not to fight, but to
stand his ground and try to explain. "Wait!" he cried in a trembly
voice. "Please do not touch me until you've listened to my story. I'm
a raccoon myself, and I've come--"

"Don't listen to him!" cried the big raccoon up the tree. "Catch him
and bite him!"

There was a sound of gnashing teeth all around which made Washer
shiver. One of the raccoons sprang forward and snapped at his tail.

"I'm your friend!" cried Washer, drawing his tail up under him.

"He's a friend of the wolves!" shouted the one from the branches of
the tree. "Don't believe him! He came here with a wolf, and he said
the wolf was his friend. Therefore, he's no friend of the raccoons."

"No! No!" cried several. "He deserves death."

Washer knew they would not listen to him. They were so excited that in
their anger they might kill him before he could tell his story.
Clearly then he had to make a desperate effort to escape. If Mother
Wolf was only near, she would protect him. In his desperation, he
cried:

"O, Mother Wolf, help me! Help me!"

"Listen to him!" said several. "He's calling to the wolves to help
him. Now we know he's a traitor."

And with that they made a rush for him. They all seemed to spring
forward at once. Instead of trying to leap over their heads, Washer
ducked down low as if to hide.

This was the only thing that saved him. The circle of raccoons
springing toward a common center came together with a plump, and some
of them were knocked over by their own weight. They bit and scratched
at each other, supposing that they had Washer, and before they could
recover from their surprise Washer was crawling stealthily between
their legs to the outskirts of the crowd. No one noticed him until he
was clear of the mass of wriggling, fighting animals.

Washer started on a run for the woods, hoping to get away in the
darkness and hide. But the big raccoon dropping out of the tree saw
him, and started in pursuit.

"There he goes!" he shouted. "Don't let him escape! Run after him!"

In a few moments the whole colony of raccoons were after him. Now
Washer felt he had an even change in a race to escape. His long
training with the wolf cubs had taught him to run with great speed.
The way he stretched his legs made even the big raccoon wonder if he
could ever overtake him.

Out of the grove of Silver Birches he ran, and when he reached the
thick woods beyond he plunged desperately into them. Big trees were
all around him, but he dared not climb one, for his pursuers would
then corner him. They could climb trees as well as he. No, he had to
escape by running and hiding.

The race was going to be a long one, for Washer was fleet of foot and
strong of muscle, and he was running for his life. But his pursuers
were equally determined to catch him, and they came after him in a
straggling line, the bigger and stronger ones leading the way.
Gradually the weaker ones were left behind, and not more than half a
dozen were in sight.

Suddenly Washer came to a clearing in the woods. In the center of this
was a pile of rocks. The thought that he might find a hole under them
where he could hide induced him to leave the woods and cross the open
space.

But the pursuing raccoons saw him, and ran pell mell into the opening.
Washer reached the rocks first, but to his dismay there was no hole
under them--not even a tiny crevice in which he could hide. It looked
as if the race was ended, and he was cornered. In a last desperate
effort he scrambled on top of the rocks, and waited.

The other raccoons followed him up there, and the leader shouted
triumphantly: "Now we've got him!"

Washer squealed as one of them nipped at his tail and another at his
front paws. "Please, please--" he began, whimpering with pain.

Now whether it was his cry, or the loud noise made by the scampering
raccoons, it is impossible to say, but there were other eyes and ears
in the woods that had been drawn to the scene, and Washer's words were
hardly out of his mouth before several dark forms shot out of the
woods and crossed the open space. At the same moment the hunting cry
of the wolf pack startled the raccoons and made them crouch in terror
on top of the rock. They forgot Washer, and turned their attention to
the wolves.

To their dismay there seemed no chance of escape. The wolves had them
surrounded on all sides as they broke from the cover of the bushes on
four sides.

That terrible, blood-thirsty hunting cry of the pack terrified the
cornered raccoons so they could not move. They flattened down on the
rock and waited for the end.

But Washer had recognized the familiar hunting cry. He knew those
voices. They came from his own foster brothers--Mother Wolf's cubs.
Fortunately Sneaky wasn't with them. Neither was there any other
member of the pack.

Washer took courage, and raised himself on the top of the rock.
"Brothers," he called as loudly as he could, "please don't hurt me or
any of my people."

The cubs stopped short at the foot of the rock, and looked up. "Why,
it's Little Brother!" they cried in a chorus.

"Yes," answered Washer, "I'm up here with my people. When the pack
said they would kill me, Mother Wolf and Black Wolf took me home. Then
I asked Mother Wolf to bring me back to my people. I knew I couldn't
live with the wolves any longer, and Mother Wolf knew she couldn't
protect me forever from them. So she said she'd bring me to my own
people. I came to Silver Birch grove, and she left me there."

"And you found your people?" asked the cubs.

"Yes, they're here with me now."

"And do they treat you well, Little Brother?" asked the oldest of the
cubs. "We thought we heard you crying for help. If they don't treat
you well, we'll kill them and eat them. We're very hungry."

"Oh, they're going to treat me well, Brothers," replied Washer. "If
you promise to go away, and not hurt them they will treat me well."

The cubs were silent for a moment. Then one of them spoke for all. "If
what you say is true, Little Brother, we won't kill them. We'll go
away, and leave them this time."

"Please do," pleaded Washer.

And the cubs, because they loved Little Brother, nodded their heads
and trotted off in the woods. In the next story Washer finds his real
brothers and mother.




STORY SIXTEEN

WASHER FINDS HIS MOTHER AND BROTHERS


When the wolf cubs had disappeared in the woods, leaving the raccoons
in possession of the rock, a long silence followed. Every little ear
was strained to catch the slightest sound of a foot-fall, for the
raccoons were still suspicious, and were ready for a trap.

But the padded feet of the wolves grew fainter and fainter, and
finally died away completely. Slowly then one after another of the
raccoons raised his head and sniffed the air. They could tell whether
there was any wolf smell near, and if one of the cubs was lying in the
bushes near they could detect it.

"You needn't be afraid," Washer said finally. "The cubs never deceived
me. They've gone away for good, and there's no danger."

"Why did they do that?" asked one of the raccoons.

"Because I was brought up in the den with them as their brother, and
we always played together and loved each other until the wolf pack
drove me away. I cannot go back to the den, for the price of death is
on my head. I have no friends among them, except Mother Wolf who
raised me, and the cubs, who are too young yet to want to kill me. But
in time they will forget their Little Brother, and hunt me like all
the others."

"What were you doing in the wolf's den in the first place?" asked one
of the raccoons.

"I was lost, and Sneaky picked me up to feed the cubs. He carried me
to his cave, but Mother Wolf took pity on me because I was only a
baby. She saved me from Sneaky and raised me with her own children."

"Why were you lost when only a baby?" queried another.

"Alas! I fell in the river one day when I was playing with my two
brothers, and I was carried over the falls. I couldn't swim, but I
clung to a board, and that saved me. I thought I was killed a dozen
times, but I wasn't, and below the falls I found a landing on the
shore. It was there that Sneaky found me and carried me away to kill
for his young."

Now one of the raccoons, who had been listening silently to Washer's
words, suddenly jumped to his feet, and ran up and peered into his
face. He looked at him so long and intently that Washer was
embarrassed.

"How many brothers had you?" he asked.

"Two," replied Washer sadly. "They were both dear to me, but I never
saw them again."

"Where was it that you fell in the river?" added the excited raccoon.

"Where the big pine lies in the river just above the falls. It was
where mother took us to play on pleasant days."

"What did your mother call you?" went on the speaker excitedly.

"Washer!"

The raccoon who had been asking these questions suddenly sprang toward
Washer as if he intended to bite him; but instead of doing that he
flung both front paws around his neck and hugged him.

"Don't you know me, Washer?" he cried. "Don't you know your own
brother? I was with you that day, and heard you cry. I thought you
were joking, and I didn't reply. Then mother heard you, and she ran
down to the river just in time to see you go over the falls. You're my
long lost brother?"

Washer was so surprised and overcome by this announcement that for a
moment he could not speak. Tears of joy started from his eyes.

"You're my own real brother?" he said in awe.

"Yes, see this scar on my paw. You remember how I got it the day I
tumbled out of my nest on the rocks?"

"Yes, yes," cried Washer excitedly. "And you remember how I broke off
the tip of my tail. See, it's gone yet. It never grew on again."

"Now, I know you, Washer," added the other, examining the end of the
tail. "Of course, you're my long lost brother."

Before the surprised raccoons they began embracing each other.
Washer's joy was so great that his heart beat like a trip-hammer.
After a while, he asked.

"And my other brother--is he alive?"

"Yes, he was with us, but didn't reach the rock. He's probably hiding
up some tree, expecting we'll all be killed by the wolves."

"Then I must go to him, too. I want to see him. And mother--is she
still alive?"

"Yes, Washer, she's alive, too, but so old and feeble, she can't hunt
with us. We have to carry food home to her. She's never forgiven
herself for losing you. She blames herself for letting you fall in the
river. It made her whole life sad. I think the joy of seeing you again
will make her young again."

"Then I must go to her at once! You will show me the way?"

"Yes, we'll all go now."

It was then that the big raccoon, who had led the others in the chase,
and who had driven Washer out of the tree, stepped forward and spoke.
He was so big and fierce looking that Washer knew he was the leader:
of the colony.

"Let me say a word before you go," he interrupted. "If this is Washer
I am glad to welcome him home again. But first I want to ask his
forgiveness. He's twice saved my life. That day when I was treed by
the wolves, and he sent them off until I could escape, I thought it
was only a trick to get me out of the tree. I bit him severely and
called him a traitor."

"But you didn't understand," interrupted Washer.

"No, I didn't understand. And again tonight when you came into Silver
Birch grove, I thought it was a trick to trap us. I saw you had a wolf
for a friend, and I thought you intended to trick all of my people.
Now, after chasing you, and threatening to kill you, you saved all our
lives again by calling off the cubs. That was a noble thing to do,
Washer. I shall never forget it--none of us shall ever forget it."

"Why, what else could I do?" stammered Washer. "I couldn't see my own
people killed."

"Not if they drove you away and refused to recognize you?" asked the
leader.

"No, not if they killed me," replied Washer.

The leader was greatly affected by these words, and his voice trembled
a little when he spoke again. "I shall never forget those words,
Washer. You have made me your friend forever. Come now, we must go to
your mother. I shall tell her the whole story, and it will gladden her
heart, and lift the sorrow that has long made it heavy."

You can imagine how happy Washer was to come back to his people and be
welcomed by them, but his joy was still greater to find that his old
mother was waiting to receive him, and that his two brothers were
ready to do anything for him to show their love. And so the great
adventure down Rocky Falls ended happily. Mothered by a wolf, Washer
had learned ways of hunting that would be of great value to him in the
future, and long after he returned to his own people he taught them
little tricks that saved many of them from the jaws of the wolf pack.
They became so shrewd and wise that the wolves found their hunting so
poor that they drew further and further away from the grove of Silver
Birches, and life was made happier and happier for the colony of
raccoons.

Washer lived a long and useful life in the woods, and perhaps you
will hear more of him and his friends in the book of

                          "Sandy the Crane."

Sandy is the first of the series of "Twilight Bird Stories," which
include interesting adventures of "Scarlet the Ibis," "Pintail the
Wild Duck," "Plover the Golden," and "Skinner the Tern."

If you read one you will want to read all, for all these bird friends
of the woods and swamps had many wonderful adventures.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WASHER THE RACCOON***


******* This file should be named 42575.txt or 42575.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/2/5/7/42575



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
