                      THE ADVENTURES OF SAMMY JAY




This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.



Title: The Adventures of Sammy Jay
Author: Thornton W. Burgess
Release Date: August 29, 2013 [EBook #43596]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SAMMY JAY
***




Produced by Al Haines.




[Illustration: Cover]




          "Matter enough, Reddy Fox!  Matter enough!" snapped
      Sammy Jay . . . _Frontispiece_ (missing from book) (Page 60)




                        The Bedtime Story-Books



                           THE ADVENTURES OF
                               SAMMY JAY


                                   BY

                          THORNTON W. BURGESS

             Author of "Old Mother West Wind," "Mother West
                    Wind ’Why’ Stories," "Adventures
                          of Mr. Mocker," etc.



                         _With Illustrations by
                             HARRISON CADY_



                                 BOSTON
                       LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
                                  1924




                           _Copyright, 1915,_
                     BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.

                         _All rights reserved_



                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




                               *CONTENTS*

CHAPTER

      I. Sammy Jay Makes a Fuss
     II. A Bitter Disappointment
    III. The Vanity of Sammy Jay
     IV. Sammy Jay Gets Even with Peter Rabbit
      V. Sammy Jay Brings News
     VI. Black Pussy Almost Catches a Good Breakfast
    VII. Chatterer Works Hard
   VIII. Sammy Jay Drops a Hint
     IX. Chatterer Screws up His Courage
      X. Chatterer Studies a Way to Get Farmer Brown’s Corn
     XI. Chatterer Grows Reckless
    XII. Chatterer Frightens Sammy Jay
   XIII. Sammy Jay Tells His Troubles to Reddy Fox
    XIV. Reddy Fox Plays Spy
     XV. Sammy Jay Spoils the Plan of Reddy Fox
    XVI. Chatterer and Sammy Jay Quarrel
   XVII. Chatterer and Sammy Jay Make Up
  XVIII. Chatterer Has to Keep His Promise
    XIX. Chatterer Gets Sammy Jay Some Corn
     XX. Chatterer Remembers Something
    XXI. Sammy Jay Makes a Call
   XXII. Chatterer Has a Dreadful Day
  XXIII. Chatterer Hits on a Plan at Last
   XXIV. Chatterer Has His Turn to Laugh




                        *LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS*


"Matter enough, Reddy Fox!  Matter enough!" snapped Sammy Jay . . .
_Frontispiece_ (missing from book)  (Page 60)

"I’ll get even with you, Peter Rabbit!" (missing from book)

Farmer Brown’s boy didn’t even look towards him

"No-o-o," replied Chatterer slowly

Sammy flew straight over to where Blacky was sitting

Chatterer gave a little gasp of fright




                           *THE ADVENTURES OF
                               SAMMY JAY*


                                  *I*

                        *SAMMY JAY MAKES A FUSS*


Sammy Jay doesn’t mind the cold of winter.  Indeed, he rather likes it.
Under his handsome coat of blue, trimmed with white, he wears a warm
silky suit of underwear, and he laughs at rough Brother North Wind and
his cousin, Jack Frost.  But still he doesn’t like the winter as well as
he does the warmer seasons because—well, because he is a lazy fellow and
doesn’t like to work for a living any harder than he has to, and in the
winter it isn’t so easy to get something to eat.

And there is another reason why Sammy Jay doesn’t like the winter as
well as the other seasons.  What do you think it is?  It isn’t a nice
reason at all. No, Sir, it isn’t a nice reason at all.  It is because it
isn’t so easy to stir up trouble.  Somehow, Sammy Jay never seems really
happy unless he is stirring up trouble for some one else.  He just
delights in tormenting other little people of the Green Meadows and the
Green Forest.

Dear, dear, it is a dreadful thing to say, but Sammy Jay is bold and
bad. He steals!  Yes, Sir, Sammy Jay steals whenever he gets a chance.
He had rather steal a breakfast any time than get it honestly.  Now
people who steal usually are very sly.  Sammy Jay is sly. Indeed, he is
one of the slyest of all the little people who live in the Green Forest.
Instead of spending his time honestly hunting for his meals, he spends
most of it watching his neighbors to find out where they have their
store-houses, so that he can help himself when their backs are turned.
He slips through the Green Forest as still as still can be, hiding in
the thick tree-tops and behind the trunks of big trees, and peering out
with those sharp eyes of his at his neighbors.  Whenever he is
discovered, he always pretends to be very busy about his own business,
and very much surprised to find any one is near.

It was in this way that he had discovered one of the store-houses of
Chatterer the Red Squirrel.  He didn’t let Chatterer know that he had
discovered it.  Oh, my, no!  He didn’t even go near it again for a long
time.  But he didn’t forget it.  Sammy Jay never forgets things of that
kind, never!  He thought of it often and often.  When he did, he would
say to himself:

    "Sometime when the snow is deep
    And Chatterer is fast asleep,
    When Mother Nature is unkind
    And things to eat are hard to find,
    I’ll help myself and fly away
    To steal again some other day."


The snow was deep now, and things to eat were hard to find, but
Chatterer the Red Squirrel wasn’t asleep.  No, indeed!  Chatterer seemed
to like the cold weather and was as frisky and spry as ever he is.  And
he never went very far away from that store-house. Sammy Jay watched and
watched, but never once did he get a chance to steal the sweet acorns
that he had seen Chatterer store away in the fall.

"H-m-m!" said Sammy Jay to himself, "I must do something to get
Chatterer away from his store-house."

For a long time Sammy Jay sat in the top of a tall, dark pine-tree,
thinking and thinking.  Then his sharp eyes twinkled with a look of
great cunning, and he chuckled.  It was a naughty chuckle.  Away he flew
to a very thick spruce-tree some distance away in the Green Forest, but
where Chatterer the Red Squirrel could hear him.  There Sammy Jay began
to make a great fuss. He screamed and screeched as only he can.  Pretty
soon, just as he expected, he saw Chatterer the Red Squirrel hurrying
over to see what the fuss was all about.  Sammy Jay slipped out of the
other side of the spruce-tree and without a sound hurried over to
Chatterer’s store-house.




                                  *II*

                       *A BITTER DISAPPOINTMENT*


As he flew through the Green Forest, Sammy Jay chuckled and chuckled to
himself.  It wasn’t a good chuckle to hear.  It was the kind of chuckle
that only folks who are doing wrong, and think they are smart because
they are doing wrong, use. Sammy Jay thought that he was smart, very
smart indeed.  He had screamed and shrieked and made a great fuss over
nothing at all until Chatterer the Red Squirrel had come hurrying over
to find out what it all meant.  Then Sammy Jay had slipped away unseen
and come straight to the store-house of Chatterer the Red Squirrel.

This particular store-house had once been the home of Blacky the Crow.
When Blacky deserted it for a new home, Chatterer had taken it for a
store-house.  He had roofed it over, and all through the pleasant fall
he had stored away nuts and acorns in it. Sammy Jay had watched him.  He
had seen those sweet acorns and nuts put there, and he had never
forgotten them.  Now, with the snow deep on the ground, the easiest way
to get a good meal that he knew of was to steal some of those very
acorns.  So he chuckled as he pulled apart the roof of Chatterer’s
store-house in search of those acorns.

Now Chatterer the Red Squirrel is quite as smart as Sammy Jay.  Indeed,
he is very much like Sammy Jay, for he is a mischief-maker and a thief
himself.  So, because people who do wrong always are on the watch for
others to do wrong, Chatterer the Red Squirrel had kept his sharp eyes
wide open all the time he had been filling his store-house in the fall,
and he had spied Sammy Jay’s smart blue coat when Sammy had thought
himself nicely hidden. Chatterer had known what Sammy Jay was hiding
there for.  His sharp eyes snapped, but he went right on filling his
store-house just the same.  Then, just as soon as he was sure that Sammy
Jay had gone away, Chatterer had taken out every one of the sweet acorns
and put them in another store-house inside a hollow tree.  He had left
nothing but hickory nuts, for he knew that these are too hard for Sammy
Jay to crack.

But Sammy Jay didn’t know anything about this, and so now, as he broke
his way into the store-house, he chuckled greedily. Pretty soon he had a
hole big enough to stick his head in, and his mouth watered as he
reached in for a sweet acorn.  All he could find were hard hickory nuts.
What did it mean?  In a great rage, Sammy Jay began to tear the
store-house to pieces. There must be some sweet acorns there somewhere!
Hadn’t he seen Chatterer put them there?  He forgot that he was
stealing.  He forgot everything except his disappointment, and the more
he thought of this, the angrier he grew. He would have pulled the
store-house all to pieces, if Chatterer himself hadn’t come home.

Sammy Jay had just stopped for breath when he heard the rattle of claws
on the bark of the tree.  He knew what that meant, and he didn’t wait to
look down.  He just spread his blue wings and with a scream of rage flew
over to the next tree.  Then such a dreadful noise as there was in the
Green Forest!

"Robber!" screamed Chatterer the Red Squirrel, dancing up and down with
anger.

"Thief yourself!" screamed Sammy Jay.

It was a dreadful quarrel, and all the little forest people who were
within hearing stopped their ears.




                                 *III*

                       *THE VANITY OF SAMMY JAY*


When Sammy Jay isn’t planning mischief, or sticking his bill into the
affairs of other folks with which he has no concern, or trying to
frighten some one bigger than himself or scare some one smaller than
himself, he spends a great deal of his time admiring his fine clothes
and thinking what a handsome fellow he is. And he is a handsome fellow.
Even Chatterer the Red Squirrel, who is always quarreling with him,
admits that Sammy Jay is a handsome fellow.  He carries himself proudly
when he thinks any one is looking.  His shape is very trim and neat, and
he is a very smart looking fellow indeed.  And his coat! Was there ever
such a coat before?  It seems as if Old Mother Nature must have cut off
a little piece of the sky when it was bluest on a summer day to make
Sammy Jay’s coat, and that she must have taken a tiny strip from the
whitest cloud to trim it with.  And then she gave him a smart cap and a
black collar and a waistcoat of just the softest grayish-white, that
shows off his blue coat best.  Old Mother Nature certainly was feeling
very good indeed when she planned Sammy Jay’s clothes.

Now Sammy Jay knows just how handsome he is.  If you should ask him, and
he would condescend to talk to you at all, which he probably wouldn’t
do, he would tell you that he is the handsomest fellow in the world.  Of
course this isn’t true, but Sammy Jay thinks it is.  And so Sammy Jay is
very fond of showing off his fine clothes and making fun of other people
who are not so finely dressed.  He spends a great deal of time in caring
for his beautiful coat and in admiring himself whenever he can see his
reflection in a little pool of water.

Now Peter Rabbit isn’t the least bit like Sammy Jay.  He doesn’t think
about his clothes at all.  Indeed, Peter thinks so little about his
clothes that it doesn’t trouble him a bit to wear a white patch on the
seat of his trousers. And Peter dearly loves to make fun of Sammy Jay.

So it tickled Peter immensely one day to find Sammy Jay admiring
himself. Peter had come up through the Green Forest without making a
sound, for with the snow covering the ground, there were no dead leaves
to rustle.  As usual, his long ears were cocked up to catch every sound.
Suddenly Peter stopped.  He had heard Sammy Jay’s voice, and by the
sound, Peter knew that Sammy was talking to himself. Very, very softly
Peter stole forward and hid where he could see Sammy Jay in a big
pine-tree.

"I’ve got the handsomest coat in all the Green Forest!" said Sammy Jay,
stretching one of his wings out and cocking his head on one side to
admire it.  "And where else is such a beautiful tail to be found?"  He
spread his tail so that a ray of sunshine would fall on it.  It
certainly was very beautiful, as blue as the sky, with a little band of
white across the tip and little bars of black across the outer sides.
Even Peter Rabbit, with his nose turned up in scorn, had to admit to
himself that it certainly was a handsome tail.

"I’m so glad it’s mine!" sighed Sammy Jay.  "It must be dreadful not to
be handsome."

Peter Rabbit could keep still no longer.  "It’s a good thing you admire
yourself, Sammy Jay, because no one else does!" he shouted.

    "Handsome is as it may do!
      Don’t forget that, Sammy Jay.
    Underneath that coat of blue
      Is a black heart, Sammy Jay.
    Everybody near and far
    Knows you for just what you are—
    Of all mischief-makers chief.
    Handsome clothes won’t hide a thief."


Sammy Jay flew into a rage, but when he opened his mouth to call Peter
names, all he could say was "Thief! thief! thief!"

"What did I tell you?" said Peter Rabbit, grinning.




                                  *IV*

                *SAMMY JAY GETS EVEN WITH PETER RABBIT*


"I’ll get even with you, Peter Rabbit!  I’ll get even with you!"  Sammy
Jay fairly hopped up and down on the branch of the big pine, he was so
angry.  Peter just thrust his tongue into one cheek in the sauciest way
and then laughed at Sammy Jay. Of course it is true, as every one in the
Green Forest and on the Green Meadows knows, that Sammy Jay is a thief.
But no one likes to be told that he is a thief, even if he is, Sammy Jay
least of all.  Like a great many other people who do wrong, Sammy Jay
likes to pretend that he is a very fine gentleman, and he wants other
people to think so too.  So he takes great care of his handsome blue
coat and struts around a great deal when he thinks other folks are
looking at him.


 *[Illustration: "I’ll get even with you, Peter Rabbit!" (missing from
                                book)]*


So Sammy Jay studied and studied how he could get even with Peter
Rabbit.  He called Peter names whenever he saw him, but Peter didn’t
mind that in the least, for he could call names back again.  Besides,
names never hurt, and it is very foolish to call them.  So Sammy Jay
studied and studied how he could get even with Peter Rabbit in some
other way.  Then one day, as he sat in the big pine-tree studying, Sammy
heard a voice that gave him an idea.  It was the voice of Redtail the
Hawk, who, you know, is own cousin to old Whitetail and to Roughleg.
Now Sammy Jay can scream so exactly like Redtail the Hawk that you
cannot tell their voices apart.  When he heard that scream, Sammy Jay
chuckled out loud. He had thought of a plan to get even with Peter
Rabbit.

Every day after that, Sammy Jay went peeking and prying through the
Green Forest and around the edge of the Green Meadows without making a
sound, just watching for Peter Rabbit. The snow was almost all gone, and
that is how it happened that Redtail had come back from the South where
he had spent the winter.  Sammy Jay felt quite sure that Peter didn’t
know that Redtail was back yet.  He hoped he didn’t, anyway.

Early one morning, Sammy Jay sat hidden on the edge of the Green Forest,
watching the Old Briar-patch where Peter Rabbit lives.  He saw Peter
come out of one of his private little paths and sit up very straight.
For a long time Peter sat looking this way and looking that way over the
Green Meadows. When he was sure that Reddy and Granny Fox were nowhere
about, and that Roughleg was nowhere in sight, Peter kicked up his heels
and scampered out on to the Green Meadows away from the dear Old
Briar-patch to see if there were any signs of spring.

Sammy waited until Peter had reached the big hickory-tree over by the
Smiling Pool, then very silently he flew over to the big hickory-tree.
Peter was so busy looking for Jerry Muskrat that he didn’t see Sammy Jay
at all. Suddenly, right over Peter’s head, sounded a fierce, shrill
scream.  Peter knew that voice.  At least, he thought he did.  He didn’t
stop to look.  He had learned long ago that it is best to run first and
look afterward.  So now he started for the dear Old Briar-patch as fast
as his long legs would take him, his heart in his mouth.

Again that fierce scream sounded right over him.  Peter ran faster than
ever, and as he ran, he dodged this way and dodged that way.  Every
second he expected to feel the sharp claws of Redtail the Hawk.  My,
such jumps as Peter did take!  It seemed to him that he never would
reach the dear Old Briar-patch.  But he did, and just as soon as he was
safely inside, he turned around to see what had become of Redtail.  And
what do you think he saw? Why, only Sammy Jay laughing fit to kill
himself.

"Fraidcat!  Fraidcat!" shouted Sammy Jay.

Peter shook his fist.  Then he grinned foolishly.  "I guess you are
even, Sammy Jay!" he said.




                                  *V*

                        *SAMMY JAY BRINGS NEWS*


Peter Rabbit had a very funny feeling.  He had started out that morning
with the best intentions in the world.  He had meant to go straight to
Chatterer the Red Squirrel and tell him how mean he had been to spy and
so find the new house that Chatterer was trying to keep a secret, and
then he had overheard Chatterer telling Tommy Tit the Chickadee how he
had fooled Peter, and that Peter didn’t know where the new house was, at
all. Peter had never felt more foolish in his life.  No, Sir, he never
had felt more foolish in his life.  Of course, if it were true that he
had been fooled and really didn’t know where Chatterer’s new house was,
there was no use in begging Chatterer’s pardon, for he would only make
himself still more of a laughing stock than he was already.  And yet the
thing he had done was just as mean as if he had found out Chatterer’s
secret, and he knew that he would feel better if he owned up.  He
scratched his left ear with his right hind foot and then scratched his
right ear with his left hind foot.  He pulled his whiskers, and still he
didn’t know what to do.

He was still trying to decide, when he heard a great racket in the
direction of the Green Forest.  It was Sammy Jay, screaming noisily as
usual, and he was hurrying straight up to the Old Orchard.  Of course
Chatterer heard him, and as soon as Sammy was within hearing, he called
to him.  Sammy hurried over at once.

"So here you are!" he exclaimed. "I’ve hunted all through the Green
Forest for you until I’m quite tuckered out.  I’ve got news for you."

"What is it?" begged Chatterer, dancing about with impatience.

"I’ve seen Shadow the Weasel," replied Sammy.

"Where is he?" asked Chatterer, and his voice sounded very anxious.

"He’s over in the Green Forest, and he says he is going to stay there
until he catches you, if he has to stay all winter," replied Sammy.  "He
says he is going to find you if he has to hunt through every tree in the
Green Forest."

Chatterer actually turned pale for a minute.  "You—you didn’t tell him
that I wasn’t in the Green Forest, did you?" he asked.

"Of course I didn’t!  How could I when I didn’t know it myself?"
retorted Sammy scornfully.

"And—and you won’t tell him when you see him again, will you, Sammy?"
begged Chatterer.

"What do you take me for?" demanded Sammy angrily.  "I haven’t got any
love for you, Chatterer, and you know it.  You’re a red-headed,
red-coated nuisance, and I’m not a bit sorry to see you in trouble, but
I wouldn’t turn my worst enemy over to such a cruel, cold-blooded robber
as Shadow the Weasel.  He would kill me just as quickly as he would you,
if he could catch me, which he can’t, and I am going to make it my
business to see to it that all the little people who are afraid of him
know that he is about.  I am going over to the Old Briar-patch right
away to warn Peter Rabbit."

"You don’t need to, because I am right here," spoke up Peter from his
hiding place.  "I am ever so much obliged to you for planning to warn
me, and I’m sorry I’ve ever said mean things about you, Sammy Jay."

"Pooh!" replied Sammy.  "You needn’t be.  I guess I’ve deserved them."

Then Sammy and Peter and Chatterer began to talk over the news about
Shadow the Weasel so eagerly that not one of them saw Black Pussy
stealing along the old stone wall.




                                  *VI*

             *BLACK PUSSY ALMOST CATCHES A GOOD BREAKFAST*


Black Pussy was out very early, hunting for her breakfast. Not that she
needed to hunt for her breakfast; oh, my, no!  Black Pussy didn’t need a
single thing.  Every morning Farmer Brown’s boy filled a saucer with
warm fresh milk for her, and every day she had all the meat that was
good for her, so there wasn’t the least need in the world for her to go
hunting.  Black Pussy was just like all cats.  Lying before the fire in
Farmer Brown’s house, blinking and purring contentedly, she seemed too
good-natured and gentle to hurt any one, and all Farmer Brown’s family
said that she was and believed it.  They knew nothing about the empty
little nests in the joyful springtime,—empty because Black Pussy had
found them and emptied them and broken the hearts of little father and
mother birds.

You see, Farmer Brown’s folks really didn’t know Black Pussy.  But the
little forest and meadow people did.  They knew that Black Pussy was
just like all cats,—fierce and cruel down inside,—and they hated Black
Pussy, every one of them.  They knew that down in her heart was the love
of killing, just that same love of killing that is in the heart of
Shadow the Weasel, and so they hated Black Pussy.  If she had had to
hunt for a living, they wouldn’t have minded so much, but she didn’t
have to hunt for a living, and so they hated her.

This particular morning Black Pussy had chosen to have a look along the
old stone wall at the edge of the Old Orchard.  Many times she had
hunted Striped Chipmunk there.  She didn’t know enough about the ways of
the little people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows to know that
this cold weather had sent Striped Chipmunk down into his snug bedroom
under ground for a long sleep, so she sneaked along from stone to stone,
hoping that she would surprise him.  She had gone half the length of the
old wall without a sign of anything to catch when she heard voices that
put all thought of Striped Chipmunk out of her head. Crawling flat on
her stomach to keep out of sight, she softly worked nearer and nearer
until, peeping from behind a big stone in the old wall, she could see
Chatterer the Red Squirrel, Peter Rabbit, and Sammy Jay talking so
busily and so excited that they didn’t seem to be paying attention to
anything else.

Sammy Jay was safe, because he was sitting in an old apple-tree, but
Chatterer was on the old wall, and Peter was on the ground.  Which
should she catch?  Peter would make the biggest and best breakfast, but
Black Pussy hadn’t forgotten the terrible kick he had once given her
when she had caught little Miss Fuzzytail up in the Old Pasture, and she
had great respect for Peter’s stout hind legs.  She would be content to
catch Chatterer this morning.  She hated him, anyway, for he had been
very saucy to her many times.  He would never make fun of her or call
her names again.

More slowly and carefully than ever, Black Pussy stole forward.  Her
eyes grew yellow with excitement, and fierce and cruel.  At last she
reached a place where one good jump would land her on Chatterer.
Carefully she drew her feet under her to make the jump.  The end of her
black tail twitched with eagerness.  Just as she got ready to spring,
there was a shrill scream from Sammy Jay.  He had caught sight of the
moving tip of that tail, and he knew what it meant.  Black Pussy sprang,
but she was just too late.  Chatterer had dived headfirst down between
the stones of the old wall at the sound of Sammy’s scream, and Peter had
dived headfirst into Johnny Chuck’s house, on the doorstep of which he
happened to be sitting. Black Pussy looked up at Sammy Jay and snarled
at him in a terrible rage. Sammy shrieked at her just as angrily. Then,
when her head was turned for just an instant, he darted down and
actually pulled a tuft of hair from her coat, and was safely out of the
way before she could turn and spring.  Then Black Pussy thrust a paw
down between the stones where Chatterer had disappeared.  She pulled it
out again with a yowl of pain, for sharp little teeth had bitten it.
Slowly and sullenly Black Pussy turned and limped back towards Farmer
Brown’s house. She suddenly remembered that saucer of milk, and that
that was really all the breakfast she wanted.




                                 *VII*

                         *CHATTERER WORKS HARD*


When Chatterer had left the Green Forest because of his terrible fear of
Shadow the Weasel, he had been fat.  At least, he had been fat for him.
All through the pleasant fall, while he had been gathering his supply of
nuts and seeds to store away for the winter, he had eaten all he could
hold and had filled his red coat out until it actually felt too tight.
But now that same red coat hung so loose on Chatterer that it looked too
big for him.  Yes, Sir, Chatterer had grown so thin that his coat
actually looked too big for him.  And he was growing thinner every day.

You see, most of the food had been collected and stored away long ago,
and Chatterer had to run about a great deal and hunt very hard to find
enough to eat day by day, while as for filling a new store-house,—that
seemed impossible! Still Chatterer kept trying, and day by day he
managed to add a little to the supply of seeds.  But it was pretty poor
fare at best.  There were no plump nuts or tasty pine-seeds, such as
filled his store-houses in the Green Forest, because no nut or
pine-trees grew near the Old Orchard, and Chatterer didn’t dare go back
to the Green Forest for fear that Shadow the Weasel would find him and
track him to his new home.  So he patiently did his best to find food
close at hand.  But it was discouraging, terribly discouraging, to work
from sun-up to sun-down, running here, running there, running
everywhere, until he was so tired he was ready to drop, and knowing all
the time that the snow might come any day and bury what little food
there was.  Oh, those were hard days for Chatterer the Red Squirrel,
very hard days indeed.

One morning he started very early and made a long journey by way of the
old stone wall and the rail fences down to Farmer Brown’s cornfield.  Of
course Farmer Brown had long ago taken away the corn, but in doing it, a
great many grains had been scattered about on the ground, half buried
where they had been trodden on, hidden under leaves and among weeds and
under the piles of stalks from which the ears had been stripped.  For
the first time for days Chatterer felt something like cheer in his
heart, as he scurried about hunting for and finding the plump yellow
grains.  First he ate all he could hold, for he saw that then there
would be plenty to take home.  Then he stuffed his cheeks full,
scrambled up on the rail fence, and started for his new home in the Old
Orchard.

"It is a terrible long way to have to carry all my supplies," thought
he, as he sat up on the top of a post to rest. "I don’t see how I ever
can do it. Well, I certainly can’t, if I sit here all day!"  With that
he jumped down to the rail below him.  He was half way across when he
noticed a crack in it.  It looked to him as if that rail were hollow
part way.  A great idea came to him.  His eyes grew bright with
excitement.  He ran the length of the rail and back again, looking for
an opening.  There was none.  Then very slowly and carefully he worked
his way back, stretching his head over so that he could look underneath.
Almost over to the next post he found what he had so hoped to find.
What was it?  Why, a knot-hole.  Yes, Sir, a knot-hole that opened right
into the hollow in the rail. It wasn’t quite big enough for Chatterer to
squeeze through, but that didn’t trouble him.  He emptied the corn from
his cheeks and then he went to work with those sharp teeth of his and in
a little while, a very little while, that knot-hole was plenty big
enough for Chatterer to slip through.

His eyes snapped with pleasure as he explored the hollow rail.  "I’ll
make this my store-house!" he cried.  "I’ll fill it full of corn, and
then when I am hungry in the winter, I can run down here and fill up.
It will be a lot better than trying to carry the corn up to the Old
Orchard."  And with that, Chatterer began the work of filling the hollow
rail with corn.




                                 *VIII*

                        *SAMMY JAY DROPS A HINT*


Whatever faults Chatterer the Red Squirrel may have, and they are many,
laziness is not one of them.  No, Sir, there is no laziness about
Chatterer.  When he has work to do, he does it, and he keeps at it until
it is finished.  Every morning he got up with the sun and raced along
the old stone wall and the rail fences down to Farmer Brown’s cornfield,
where he first ate his breakfast, and then worked to fill the hollow
rail of the fence which he had made into a store-house.  It was hard
work, because he had to do a great deal of hunting for the corn; and it
was exciting work, because he had to keep his eyes and ears open every
minute to keep from furnishing a dinner for some one else.

Redtail the Hawk, who had not yet gone South, discovered him one
morning, and Chatterer dodged behind a fence post just in time.  After
that, Redtail was on hand every morning, watching from the top of a tree
for Chatterer to grow careless and get too far from shelter.

Then one morning Reddy Fox surprised him at the edge of a heap of
cornstalks.  Chatterer had just time to wriggle his way to the middle of
the heap. Reddy had seen him, and he could smell him.  Very softly Reddy
tiptoed around the pile of cornstalks to see if Chatterer had come out
on the other side.  Then he came back to where Chatterer had gone in and
excitedly began to dig, making the dry stalks fly right and left. He
made so much noise that Chatterer felt sure that he wouldn’t hear him
move, and he didn’t.  By the time Reddy had worked his way to the middle
of the pile, Chatterer was safe in his store-house in the hollow rail.
He had slipped from under the cornstalks, run across to another pile,
worked his way through this, and so reached the fence.

After that, Reddy Fox came every morning, hoping to surprise Chatterer.
But Chatterer felt quite equal to fooling Reddy and Redtail.  Of course
they interfered with his work and were very bothersome, but he wasn’t
afraid of them.  The one thing he did fear was that Shadow the Weasel
would hear where he was.  That thought bothered him a great deal.

One morning Sammy Jay just happened along.  He saw Reddy Fox creeping up
behind some bushes at the edge of the cornfield, and at once Sammy began
to scream as he always does when he thinks he can spoil Reddy’s hunting.
Reddy looked up at him and showed all his long teeth, but Sammy only
grinned and screamed the louder.  Then Reddy walked away with a great
deal of dignity, for he knew that it wasn’t the least use to try to hunt
while Sammy Jay was about.  When he had disappeared in the Green Forest,
Sammy returned to the cornfield, and there he found Chatterer hard at
work.

"I’m much obliged, Sammy, for driving that nuisance away; he bothers me
a great deal, and I’ve got to do a lot of work yet to fill my
store-house before it is too late," said Chatterer, as he hurried to the
hollow rail with his mouth full of corn.

"Have you moved down here?" demanded Sammy Jay.  "I thought you were
living up in the Old Orchard."

"I am.  At least, my house is up there, but there is no food there, and
so I have made a store-house down here and am trying to get it full of
corn before snow comes," replied Chatterer.

"It will be a long way to come for your food every day," said Sammy.

"I know it," replied Chatterer, "but I guess I’m lucky to have any food
to come for."

"Pooh!" said Sammy, "I wouldn’t work as you do.  I’d use my wits a
little.  If corn is what you want to eat, why don’t you go up to Farmer
Brown’s?  It’s nearer to the Old Orchard than this, and the corn is all
stored ready for you to help yourself. I get all I want there."




                                  *IX*

                   *CHATTERER SCREWS UP HIS COURAGE*


Ever since Sammy Jay had dropped a hint about the plentiful supply of
corn over at Farmer Brown’s and how easy it was to get all that one
wanted, Chatterer had been trying to screw up his courage to go see for
himself if Sammy had told the truth.  Chatterer had spent most of his
life in or close to the Green Forest. He had a very wholesome fear of
Farmer Brown’s boy and his dreadful gun, and he always had been content
to keep away from Farmer Brown’s door-yard. The truth is, he was afraid
to go up there.  You see, there were Black Pussy the Cat and Bowser the
Hound and Farmer Brown’s boy—why, it was a terribly dangerous place!

And yet Sammy Jay went up there every day and didn’t seem to be in the
least afraid.  He even scolded and said impudent things to Farmer
Brown’s boy.  If Sammy dared go up there, why shouldn’t he?  He
certainly was as brave as Sammy Jay!  Right down in his heart Chatterer
had always thought Sammy Jay very much of a coward. Yet here was Sammy
going up there and helping himself to corn, just as if it belonged to
him.  Chatterer thought how hard he worked every day to fill that
store-house in the hollow fence-rail, and how every minute of the time
he had to watch out for Redtail the Hawk and Reddy Fox.  It seemed as if
he never, never could get enough corn to keep him all winter.  And then
it was a long way to go every day from the Old Orchard down to the
cornfield. Chatterer sighed at the thought.

"If Sammy Jay told me the truth, and it is so easy to get all the corn
one wants over there at Farmer Brown’s, it will be ever so much easier
in bad weather," thought Chatterer.  "Anyway, it won’t do any harm to
have a look and see for myself how things are."

So Chatterer started running briskly along the old stone wall which led
right up to Farmer Brown’s yard.  As he drew near, he would stop every
few steps to make sure that the way was clear.  At last he reached the
very end of the wall, and hiding between two stones, he peeked out.
Right across a wide road was Farmer Brown’s house, and in the sun on the
back doorstep sat Black Pussy dozing.  Chatterer had hard work to hold
his tongue.  The very sight of her made him so angry that he almost
forgot that he didn’t want to be seen.  He just longed to tell her what
he thought of her.  But he kept still and set his sharp little eyes to
discover where Farmer Brown kept his corn. He could see Bowser the Hound
fast asleep in front of his own special little house.  He could see the
big barn and the henhouse and the shed where the wagons were kept and
the long wood-shed.

"I wonder," said Chatterer to himself, "I wonder if that corn is kept in
any of those places, and how Sammy Jay gets it if it is."

Just then Farmer Brown’s boy came out of the barn.  Chatterer dodged
back at sight of him.  He wanted to scold, just as he had wanted to
scold at Black Pussy, but he wisely held his tongue. Farmer Brown’s boy
didn’t even look towards him but went straight over to a queer little
building standing high on four legs and with wide cracks between the
boards of the walls, through which something yellow showed.  Farmer
Brown’s boy went up several steps and opened a door.  Chatterer gave a
little gasp.  There was the corn, more corn than he ever had seen in all
his life, more corn than he had supposed the whole world held!
Chatterer made up his mind right then and there that he was going to
have some of that corn in spite of Black Pussy and Bowser the Hound and
Farmer Brown’s boy.  The very sight of it screwed his courage up till he
felt brave enough to dare anything.

[Illustration: Farmer Brown’s boy didn’t even look towards him.]




                                  *X*

                    *CHATTERER STUDIES A WAY TO GET
                          FARMER BROWN’S CORN*


Chatterer could think of but one thing—Farmer Brown’s house full of
corn, and how he could get some of it.  Sammy Jay had said that he got
all he wanted, and Chatterer made up his mind that he would see how
Sammy did it.

So very early the next morning Chatterer was in his hiding place between
the stones of the old wall.  Just as Mr. Sun shot his first red rays in
at the windows of Farmer Brown’s house, Sammy Jay arrived.  For a wonder
he made no noise.  Chatterer noticed this right away.  Sammy peered this
way and that way, without making the least sound.  When he was quite
sure that no one was about, he flew over to the queer little house on
four legs, where Farmer Brown kept his corn, and thrust his bill in
between the wide cracks of the wall. In this way he helped himself to
all the corn he wanted without the least bit of trouble.  When he had
enough, he flew away as quietly as he had come.

Chatterer grinned.  "Sammy has taught me something, although he doesn’t
know it," said he to himself. "He’s stealing that corn, and he doesn’t
think it safe to be found out.  I must be just as careful as he is."

There were no signs of any one around Farmer Brown’s house.  Chatterer
scurried across the yard as fast as his little legs would take him
straight for the little house.  There he found a great disappointment.
He couldn’t get up to the cracks through which Sammy Jay had helped
himself to corn.  You see, the little house stood on four stone legs,
and before it had been put on those four legs, an old pan had been
placed bottom up on each leg.  It would be the hardest kind of hard work
to climb one of those stone legs, anyway, and even if he did succeed in
climbing it, there was no way of getting around that tin pan at the top,
and of course he couldn’t gnaw through it.  Chatterer ground his teeth
with anger.  It was so terribly provoking to be so near such a feast and
still not be able to get to it.  He wished he had wings like Sammy Jay.

Chatterer was so intent on studying out some way to get at that corn
that he quite forgot everything else.  The rustle of a leaf made him
turn his head. Goodness gracious! there was Black Pussy within two jumps
of him, and her eyes were yellow with fierce desire. Chatterer darted to
the nearest tree and scrambled up as fast as he could.

He wasn’t the least bit afraid now, because he knew that he could run
out on the little branches where Black Pussy would not dare to follow
him.  So he faced about and he called Black Pussy everything bad he knew
of. When she had slunk away, Chatterer scampered to the very top of the
tree to think matters over, and right then he discovered a way to get
the corn from Farmer Brown’s little house.




                                  *XI*

                       *CHATTERER GROWS RECKLESS*


Chatterer saw that a branch of the very tree he was sitting in stretched
right over the roof of the little house and the very tips of some of the
twigs actually touched it.

Chatterer’s eyes danced.  "If I can’t get in from the ground, perhaps I
can get in from the air," said he and chuckled.  Chatterer looked around
hastily to see if any one was watching. No one was in sight but Black
Pussy, watching him from the ground.  He didn’t mind her up there so he
ran lightly out along the branch over the roof of the little house and
jumped on to it.  Swiftly he ran around the edge of it, peeping over.
He was looking for an opening big enough to crawl through.

At last, over in one corner, he spied a knothole close up under the edge
of the roof.  Chatterer dug his sharp claws into the wood to keep from
falling and very carefully crept over until he had safely reached the
hole.  It wasn’t quite big enough to push his head wholly; through.
Gnaw, gnaw, gnaw!  The little splinters began to fly.  Gnaw, gnaw, gnaw!
The hole was big enough, and Chatterer slipped safely inside just as
Farmer Brown’s boy came out of the house and noticed Black Pussy sitting
on the ground, staring up at the roof of the little house.

"Hello, Puss!  Did you think you heard a mouse in there?" exclaimed
Farmer Brown’s boy.  "You didn’t, because no mice can get in there. Come
along over to the barn, and I’ll give you some nice fresh warm milk."

"Phew!" exclaimed Chatterer to himself, "That was a narrow escape! I’m
glad that pesky black cat can’t tell what she saw!"

When they were out of sight, Chatterer turned to see what kind of a
place he was in.  His eyes glistened with greed.  Corn, corn, com
everywhere! It seemed to him there was corn enough for all the Squirrels
in the world.

"And it’s all mine!" gasped Chatterer, quite forgetting that he was
stealing.  Then he began to eat, and he ate and ate until he couldn’t
swallow another mouthful.

"I believe I’ll take a nap right here," said he to himself, and curled
up in the darkest corner.  In two minutes he was fast asleep, dreaming
that all the world seemed to have turned to golden corn and all for him.




                                 *XII*

                    *CHATTERER FRIGHTENS SAMMY JAY*


Chatterer the Red Squirrel was mightily tickled with himself because he
had found a way of getting into Farmer Brown’s corn-crib, where was
stored so much beautiful yellow corn that it seemed to him that there
was enough for all the Squirrels in the world.

The more some people have, the more they want.  It is the very worst
kind of selfishness and is called greediness. Chatterer had found a way
to get all the corn he wanted without working for it, and there was
enough to feed him as long as he lived, though he should live to be a
hundred years old.  To be sure, it wasn’t his; it was Farmer Brown’s.
But Chatterer looked on Farmer Brown and Farmer Brown’s boy as his
enemies, and he could see nothing wrong in taking things from his
enemies. Perhaps he didn’t want to see anything wrong.  All his life he
had stolen from his neighbors.  That is one reason they dislike him so.
Anyway, if ever a little voice down inside tried to tell him that he was
doing wrong, Chatterer didn’t listen to it.  Perhaps, after a while, the
little voice grew tired and didn’t try any more.

After Chatterer had made a few successful trips to the corn-crib, he
began to look upon it as his own.  He would sometimes hide in the old
stone wall, where he could watch Farmer Brown’s boy open the door of the
corn-crib and fill a basket with yellow ears to feed to the hens and the
pigs and the horses. At such times Chatterer would work himself into a
great rage, as if Farmer Brown’s boy were stealing from him. But there
was nothing he could do about it, so he would go back to the Old Orchard
and scold for an hour.  But what made him still angrier was to see Sammy
Jay help himself to a few grains of corn from between the cracks in the
walls of the corn-crib.  He forgot how Sammy had first told him about
the corn-crib, and how Sammy had warned him about Shadow the Weasel.
That is the trouble with greed: it forgets everything but the desire to
have and to keep others from having.  Chatterer didn’t say anything to
Sammy Jay, because he knew it would be of no use. Besides, if he did,
Sammy might meet him over in the corn-crib some day and make such a fuss
that Farmer Brown’s boy would find him.

Finally Chatterer thought of a plan and chuckled wickedly.  The next
morning he was over in the corn-crib bright and early.  This time he
stayed there until it was time for Sammy Jay to arrive.  Peeping out of
the hole by which he came and went, he saw Sammy come flying from the
Old Orchard. Sammy made no noise, for you see Sammy meant to steal, too.
Presently Sammy found a crack against which an ear of corn lay very
close.  He began to peck at it and pick out the grains. Chatterer stole
over to it, taking the greatest care not to make a sound. Presently
Sammy’s black bill came poking through the crack.  Chatterer seized it
and held on.

Poor Sammy Jay!  He was terribly frightened.  He thought that it was
some kind of a trap.  He beat his wings and tried to scream but
couldn’t, because he couldn’t open his mouth. Then Chatterer let go so
suddenly that Sammy almost fell to the ground before he could catch his
balance.  He didn’t wait to see what had caught him.  He started for the
Green Forest as fast as his wings could take him, and as he went he
screamed with fright and anger.  Chatterer chuckled, and his chuckle was
a very wicked sounding chuckle.

"I guess," said Chatterer, "that Sammy Jay will leave my corn alone
after this."




                                 *XIII*

              *SAMMY JAY TELLS HIS TROUBLES TO REDDY FOX*


Sammy Jay could think of nothing but the terrible fright he had had at
Farmer Brown’s corn-crib. He had thrust his bill through a crack for a
few grains of corn when something had seized his bill and hung on.
Sammy didn’t have the least bit of doubt that it was a trap of some kind
set by Farmer Brown’s boy.  He flew down to the Green Forest to think it
over and plan some way to get even with Farmer Brown’s boy.  As he sat
there muttering to himself, along came Reddy Fox. For a wonder Reddy saw
Sammy before Sammy saw him.

Reddy grinned.  "Sammy certainly has got something on his mind," thought
Reddy.  Then he said aloud: "Hello, Sammy!  What’s the matter? You look
as if you had the stomach-ache and the head-ache and a few other aches."

"Matter enough, Reddy Fox! Matter enough!" snapped Sammy.  Then, because
he felt that he just had to tell some one, he told Reddy all about his
terrible fright that morning.

"It was a trap," said Sammy.  "It was some kind of a trap set by Farmer
Brown’s boy.  Just as if he couldn’t spare a few grains of corn when he
has got so much!  I—I—I’d like to—to peck his eyes out!  That’s what I’d
like to do!"

Sammy said that because it was the most dreadful thing he could think
of, but he didn’t really mean it.  Reddy knew it and grinned, for he
also knew that Sammy didn’t dare go near enough to Farmer Brown’s boy to
more than scream at him.  All the time he had been listening, Reddy had
sat with his head cocked on one side, which is a way he has when he is
thinking.  Inside he was laughing, for Reddy knows a lot about traps and
about Farmer Brown’s boy, and he didn’t believe that Farmer Brown’s boy
would ever set a trap in such a queer place as a crack in the wall of a
corn-crib.

"He wouldn’t bother to try to trap Sammy Jay; he would just watch with
his gun and shoot Sammy if he really cared about the few grains of corn
Sammy has taken," thought Reddy. "It was some one or something else that
frightened Sammy.  But it isn’t the least bit of use to tell him so.  I
believe I’ll have a look and see what is going on at that corn-crib."
Aloud he said:

"That was a terrible experience, Sammy Jay, and I don’t wonder that you
were frightened.  Are you going up there to-morrow morning?"

"What?" screamed Sammy.  "Going up there again?  What do you take me
for?  I guess I don’t need but one lesson of that kind.  There’s plenty
to eat in the Green Forest and on the Green Meadows without running any
such risk as that.  No, Sir, you won’t catch me around Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib again very soon.  Not if my name is Sammy Jay!"

"You are wise, very wise," replied Reddy gravely.  "It is always wise to
keep out of danger."  And with this Reddy trotted on up the Lone Little
Path, and inside his red head were busy thoughts.  Reddy had made up his
mind that there was something very queer about Sammy Jay’s fright, and
he meant to find out about it.  He would be on hand at the first peep of
day the next morning and see what was going on around Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib.

And all day long Sammy Jay flew about through the Green Forest telling
every one who would listen how Farmer Brown’s boy had tried to trap him.
Late that afternoon he visited the Old Orchard and told his story all
over again to Chatterer the Red Squirrel, and Chatterer didn’t so much
as smile until after Sammy had left.  Then he threw himself on the
ground and rolled over and over and laughed until his sides ached.




                                 *XIV*

                         *REDDY FOX PLAYS SPY*


Reddy Fox didn’t have to get up early to be hiding behind the fence back
of Farmer Brown’s corn-crib when jolly, round, red Mr. Sun chased the
little stars from the sky. He didn’t have to get up early, for the very
good reason that he hadn’t been to bed.  You see, Reddy Fox does a great
many things that he wouldn’t like to have seen, and so he does them in
the night when most of the other little people of the Green Meadows and
the Green Forest are asleep.  And so it happens that often he does not
go to bed at all at night, but sleeps in the day, when most honest
people are abroad. He had been roaming about all this night, and now he
had come to watch and see what was going on at Farmer Brown’s corn-crib,
and whether or not Farmer Brown’s boy had been setting a trap there for
Sammy Jay, as Sammy was so sure he had.

Just as the little stars disappeared and the first faint light from Mr.
Sun began to chase away the black shadows, Reddy’s sharp eyes saw
something move over at the corner of the old stone wall at the edge of
the Old Orchard. Then a little dark form scampered across the road, and
there was the scratch of sharp little claws on the tree growing near the
corn-crib.  Reddy grinned and watched the top of the tree. In a minute
the same little form ran out along a limb that overhung the corn-crib
and nimbly jumped to the roof.  It ran along one edge and suddenly
disappeared.  Reddy guessed right away that there was a hole there.  He
arose and stretched.

"I thought as much," said Reddy to himself.  "I thought as much."  Then
he lay down to watch again.  After a while, out popped the same lively
little form.  It was quite light now, light enough for Reddy to see the
red coat of Chatterer the Red Squirrel.

Chatterer’s cheeks were stuffed so full of corn that his head looked
twice as large as it really is.  He ran along the roof to where the tips
of the limb of the tree brushed the roof, climbed into the tree, looked
sharply to make sure that no one was about, particularly Black Pussy,
and then ran down the tree and scurried across the road to the safety of
the old stone wall.

"Ha!" said Reddy Fox, "I thought so!  Unless I am much, very, very much
mistaken, Chatterer can tell Sammy Jay what caught him by the bill
yesterday morning and frightened him nearly to death.  I’ve wondered why
he no longer came to that new store-house of his that he worked so hard
to fill down at the edge of the cornfield, and now I know.  My, but
Chatterer is getting fat!  I think he will make me a very good
breakfast.  I do, indeed!"

Reddy licked his lips as if he could already taste fat Red Squirrel, and
then slipped away in the other direction, for it was getting so light
that he dared stay no longer so near to Farmer Brown’s house and Bowser
the Hound.

All the way to the Green Forest Reddy grinned, partly at thought of the
sharp trick he was sure Chatterer had played on Sammy Jay, and partly at
thought of the good breakfast he was sure he would have one of these
fine mornings, for already he had thought of a plan to catch Chatterer.
But first he would find Sammy Jay.  He wanted to see how foolish Sammy
would look when he found out that it wasn’t a trap of Farmer Brown’s
boy’s at all that had frightened him so.




                                  *XV*

                *SAMMY JAY SPOILS THE PLAN OF REDDY FOX*


Reddy Fox found Sammy Jay in a bad temper.  Sammy had missed his usual
breakfast of corn stolen from Farmer Brown’s corn-crib, and it had made
him cross.

"Good morning," said Reddy in his politest manner, and no one can be
more polite than Reddy Fox when he sets out to be.

"Morning," mumbled Sammy Jay.

"I found out something this morning which may interest you," said Reddy,
taking no notice of Sammy’s cross looks.

"It won’t," replied Sammy positively.  "It won’t.  Nothing interests
me."

"Not even traps?" asked Reddy slyly.

"What’s that?" demanded Sammy, looking at Reddy sharply.

"Oh, nothing much," replied Reddy, quite as if the matter didn’t
interest him especially, "only I found out something this morning that I
thought you might like to see, if you wasn’t such a coward."

"Who says I’m a coward?" shrieked Sammy Jay, dancing about with anger.

"I do," replied Reddy.  "You don’t dare go with me to-morrow morning and
see what is going on at Farmer Brown’s corn-crib."

"It isn’t true!" Sammy shrieked. "I dare go wherever you dare go, so
there, Reddy Fox!"

"Then I dare you to meet me to-morrow morning at the edge of the Green
Forest at sun-up and go with me to watch Farmer Brown’s corn-crib,"
Reddy replied.

"I’ll be there!" snapped Sammy. "I’ll have you to understand that you
don’t dare do anything that I don’t dare do!" snapped Sammy, though to
tell the truth he had felt his heart sink at the mere mention of Farmer
Brown’s corn-crib, for you remember it was there that he had had a
terrible fright only the morning before.

"All right, see that you are on hand at sun-up sharp," replied Reddy and
trotted away grinning, for he was smart enough to know that Sammy would
risk a great deal rather than be called a coward, for no one likes to be
called a coward.

Early the next morning Reddy Fox and Sammy Jay met at the edge of the
Green Forest.

"Now," Reddy explained, "we will go over by the fence back of the
corn-crib. I will hide there, just where I hid yesterday morning, and
you will hide in the evergreen-tree close by.  Watch the roof of the
corn-crib, and I think you will see something that may explain how you
happened to be caught by the bill the other morning.  But whatever you
see, don’t make a sound, not the least bit of a sound."

Sammy promised, and they hurried over to their hiding places.  Hardly
had Sammy settled himself in the evergreen-tree when he saw Chatterer
jump to the roof of the corn-crib from the limb of the tree which
overhung it. Almost in a flash Chatterer had disappeared through a hole
just under the edge of the roof.  No sooner was he out of sight, than
Reddy Fox ran swiftly across to the old stone wall at the edge of the
Old Orchard and hid behind it. Right away Sammy Jay guessed that
Chatterer had had something to do with the terrible fright he had had at
the corn-crib when his bill was caught as he pecked at the corn between
the cracks in the wall.

"It wasn’t a trap at all, but Chatterer!" thought Sammy and right away
grew so angry that he could hardly sit still.  But he wanted to see what
Chatterer would do next, so he bit his tongue to keep it still.  Pretty
soon out came Chatterer with his cheeks stuffed full of corn.  That was
too much for Sammy Jay.  He forgot all about his promise not to make a
sound.  He darted out of his hiding place and flew at Chatterer in a
terrible rage, screaming at the top of his voice and calling Chatterer
every bad thing he could think of.  Of course Chatterer couldn’t reply,
because his cheeks were so stuffed with corn, but he could run.  Like a
little red flash he was in the tree that overhung the corn-crib and
dodging around the trunk.

Over behind the stone wall Reddy Fox snarled, for with such a noise he
knew it wasn’t safe to stay there any longer.




                                 *XVI*

                   *CHATTERER AND SAMMY JAY QUARREL*


    When people lose their tempers
      Oh what a sorry sight!
    They call each other dreadful names,
      And sometimes scratch and bite.
    The Merry Little Breezes ran
      And hid themselves away
    When Chatterer his temper lost,
      And so did Sammy Jay.


It really was too dreadful!  It quite spoiled the day for all the little
people who were within sound of their voices.  You see, when Sammy Jay
discovered that it was Chatterer and not a trap set by Farmer Brown’s
boy that had given him such a fright at Farmer Brown’s corn-crib, right
away Sammy’s temper just boiled right over. Chatterer had his mouth so
full of corn that he couldn’t say a word, but he could run; and run he
did, scampering across Farmer Brown’s dooryard to the shelter of the old
stone wall at the edge of the Old Orchard with Sammy after him,
screaming "Thief! thief! thief!" at the top of his lungs.

"My gracious, what a racket!" exclaimed Farmer Brown’s boy, as he opened
the door.  "That Jay is making such a fuss that I should think there was
a fox about."  He put his milk-pails down and stepped back into the
house.  In a minute he was out again, with his terrible gun in his
hands.  He went straight to the old stone wall where only a few minutes
before Reddy Fox had been hiding, and it was well for Reddy that he had
slipped away the minute Sammy Jay began to scream at Chatterer.  Farmer
Brown’s boy looked disappointed when he saw no signs of Reddy.  Then he
went over to the little house of Bowser the Hound and unchained Bowser.

Bowser wagged his tail and yelped with delight when he saw the gun, for
he dearly loves to hunt.  He ran ahead back to the Old Orchard, and
almost at once his great, deep voice told all within hearing that his
wonderful nose had found the tracks of Reddy Fox.

"I thought so," said Farmer Brown’s boy.  "I thought there had been a
fox here."  Then he sighed, for he would have liked nothing better than
to go hunt for Reddy.  But there were the empty milk-pails, and Farmer
Brown’s boy is not the kind who run away for pleasure when there is work
to be done.

Sammy Jay had flown away as soon as he saw Farmer Brown’s boy and his
terrible gun.  Chatterer had hidden in the old stone wall, where he
safely stored away the corn with which his cheeks had been stuffed.  As
soon as Farmer Brown’s boy had gone to the barn to milk the cows, Sammy
Jay slipped back to the Old Orchard to look for Chatterer, and his
temper hadn’t improved a bit.  He soon saw Chatterer running along the
old wall and once more began to scream "Thief! thief!"  And now that his
mouth was empty, Chatterer could reply, and you know Chatterer has one
of the worst tongues of all the little people of the Green Forest.

"Thief yourself!" he screamed back.  "Thief yourself!  You stole my
corn!"

"It isn’t your corn any more than it’s mine!" screamed Sammy.  "I told
you about it in the first place. Thief! thief! thief!"

And from that, they fell to calling each other worse things.  The Old
Orchard never had heard such a quarrel, never.  It was dreadful!  All
day long they kept it up.  Twice Farmer Brown’s boy came down to see if
that fox had come back, and scratched his head, and wondered what all
the fuss was about. At last Sammy Jay had a thought.

"I’m going straight over to the Green Forest to tell Shadow the Weasel
where you are living!" he cried suddenly.  "When he finds you, you won’t
steal any more corn or be so greedy that you won’t let other people have
a share."




                                 *XVII*

                   *CHATTERER AND SAMMY JAY MAKE UP*


When Chatterer heard Sammy Jay say that he was going straight to the
Green Forest to tell Shadow the Weasel that Chatterer was living in the
Old Orchard, a great fear filled his heart.  He forgot his quarrel with
Sammy.  He forgot his greed for all the corn in Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib.  He forgot everything but his terrible fear of Shadow the
Weasel.  It was because of Shadow that Chatterer had left the Green
Forest to live in the Old Orchard.  If Shadow should find him here, he
didn’t know what he could do or where he could go.  He knew that Sammy
Jay meant just what he said, for though it would be a dreadful thing to
do, people do dreadful things when they are angry, and Sammy Jay was
very, very angry indeed.  He had already spread his wings when Chatterer
spoke.

"Please don’t do that, Sammy Jay," he begged, "I—I—I didn’t mean all the
bad things I have said."

Sammy Jay’s eyes snapped.  He saw right away that Chatterer was very
much frightened, and he knew that hereafter so long as Shadow the Weasel
was anywhere around, Chatterer would be so afraid that he would do
anything Sammy might want him to.  You see, Sammy Jay is very sharp.

"Am I any more of a thief than you are?" he demanded.

"No-o-o," replied Chatterer slowly, as if it were the hardest work to
say it.

[Illustration: "No-o-o," replied Chatterer slowly.]

"Will you play any more tricks on me?" asked Sammy.

"No," replied Chatterer more promptly this time.

"Well, I’ll think it over and make up my mind in the morning," said
Sammy.  "Perhaps I will and perhaps I won’t tell Shadow where you are
living.  I’ll think it over."

Now Sammy knew perfectly well that Chatterer wouldn’t sleep a wink that
night for worrying.  Already he had made up his mind not to tell Shadow,
for like all the other little meadow and forest people he hated Shadow.
But of course Chatterer couldn’t know that he had so made up his mind,
and a great fear that Sammy might tell clutched his heart.

"If you’ll promise not to tell Shadow where I am, you—you are welcome to
all the corn you want at Farmer Brown’s corn-crib," said Chatterer, in a
very meek voice.

"Indeed!" replied Sammy.  "How very generous of you, seeing that it
doesn’t belong to you, anyway, and I have just as much right to it as
you have."

"And—and—well, I’ll help you get it," continued Chatterer, his sharp
wits working their hardest to think of some way to get Sammy to make
that promise.

"How?" asked Sammy suspiciously.

"Why, when you can’t get it between the cracks, I’ll bring some out for
you and hide it in the stone wall where you can find it," replied
Chatterer.  But in his heart he said that he would hide it so that Sammy
would have to hunt a long time to find it.  It seemed almost as if Sammy
read that thought, for cocking his head on one side, he said:

"I’ll promise not to tell Shadow, if you’ll promise to get me corn
whenever I want it and put it just where I tell you to."

Chatterer didn’t like that idea at all, but what could he do?  He
thought it over so long that Sammy Jay spread his wings as if to start
that very instant for the Green Forest.

"I promise!" cried Chatterer hastily.

And so these two scamps of the Green Forest made up and planned how they
would live all winter on Farmer Brown’s corn.




                                *XVIII*

                  *CHATTERER HAS TO KEEP HIS PROMISE*


Chatterer wished now that he hadn’t been quite so greedy. If he had been
content to let Sammy Jay get what corn he could from Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib, instead of playing that sharp trick to frighten him away,
Chatterer wouldn’t have had to make that promise to get the corn for
Sammy and put it wherever Sammy wanted it put.  It wasn’t much to do.
Chatterer really didn’t mind doing the thing itself; it was the thought
that Sammy could make him do it.

Now Chatterer has sharp wits, and Sammy Jay has sharp wits.  Chatterer
had always thought his the sharpest, and it hurt his pride to feel that
Sammy had got the best of him.  He couldn’t think of anything else as he
curled up for the night in his snug bed in the old home of Drummer the
Woodpecker up in the Old Orchard.  He thought and thought and thought
and thought, trying to find some way to wriggle out of his promise, and
just before he fell asleep, an idea came to him.  He would go over to
the corn-crib before Sammy Jay was awake, eat his fill, and then hide
from Sammy.

"Why didn’t I think of that before?" he murmured sleepily and smiled to
think how, after all, his wits were sharper than those of Sammy Jay.

The next morning, very early, Chatterer visited the corn-crib, ate a
hurried breakfast, and then hid in the old stone wall to watch for Sammy
Jay. But Sammy didn’t come at the time he used to visit the corn-crib
before Chatterer had given him that terrible scare. Chatterer waited and
waited, but no Sammy Jay.  Chatterer began to get impatient, but still
he didn’t dare leave his hiding place for fear that Sammy might come.
At last Chatterer decided that Sammy had gone somewhere else that
morning, so he came out of his hiding place and frisked along the stone
wall at one edge of the Old Orchard. After a while he forgot all about
Sammy Jay.  Anyway, he was sure that Sammy wouldn’t think of going to
the corn-crib so late in the morning, for it wouldn’t be safe at all.
Farmer Brown’s boy would be almost sure to see him.  So Chatterer forgot
his troubles and frisked about and had a splendid time all by himself.

Right in the midst of it, Sammy Jay arrived in the Old Orchard.

"Good morning, Chatterer," said he. "I fear I am a little late for
breakfast."

"Breakfast!" sneered Chatterer, "Breakfast!  Why, it’s nearer dinner
time.  I had my breakfast hours ago."

"I thought likely," replied Sammy, and there was a mischievous look in
his sharp black eyes, "but I was rather tired this morning, and as long
as I hadn’t got to go way over to the corn-crib myself, I thought I
wouldn’t hurry. I suppose you have plenty of corn ready for me here."

"Corn ready for you?  I should say not!" snapped Chatterer.  "You didn’t
say anything about getting corn for you this morning."

"Didn’t I?  Well, I guess I must have forgotten to.  Never mind—you can
run over there and get some for me now," replied Sammy.

"Go yourself!" snapped Chatterer.

"I think I’d rather not," replied Sammy.  "Farmer Brown’s boy is
chopping wood right close by the corn-crib, so I prefer to have you go."

"I won’t!" Chatterer fairly screamed and danced about in his rage. "I
won’t!"

"Oh, all right," replied Sammy, yawning.  "I saw Shadow the Weasel down
in the Green Forest this morning, and he inquired for you.  I think I’ll
go look him up again."

Chatterer turned pale.  He feared Shadow the Weasel more than any one
else under the sun.  He would rather face Farmer Brown’s boy.  "I—I’ll
go," he stammered weakly.  There was no way out of it; he just had to
keep his promise.




                                 *XIX*

                  *CHATTERER GETS SAMMY JAY SOME CORN*


In all his life Chatterer had never felt so angry and so helpless.  He
had thought himself so smart that he could outwit Sammy Jay, and instead
Sammy had outwitted him.  This was bad enough in itself, but to make
matters worse he had to do something which he felt was very dangerous.
He had to get Sammy some corn from Farmer Brown’s corn-crib right in
broad daylight, and there was Black Pussy sitting on the doorstep of
Farmer Brown’s house, and Farmer Brown’s boy himself was chopping wood
close by the corn-crib.  But if he didn’t keep his promise, Sammy would
go tell Shadow the Weasel where he was living, and Chatterer was more
afraid of Shadow than of Black Pussy and Farmer Brown’s boy.  Wasn’t it
a terrible position to be in?  Chatterer thought so.  And all the time
he knew that it was all his own fault.  If he hadn’t been so greedy and
tried to scare Sammy Jay away from the corn-crib, he wouldn’t be in such
a fix now.

He ran along the stone wall to the end at the edge of Farmer Brown’s
dooryard.  Then he peeped out.  Black Pussy was dozing on the doorstep.
Her eyes were closed.  Chatterer started across for the tree close by
the corn-crib, and then his courage failed, and he ran back to the stone
wall.  Three times he did this, and each time he looked up to see Sammy
Jay grinning at him from an apple-tree in the Old Orchard.  It was very
plain to see that Sammy was enjoying Chatterer’s fright.  Chatterer
almost cried with fear and anger.

The fourth time he gritted his teeth and kept on running as fast as he
knew how.  He was almost past Black Pussy when she opened her eyes.  In
a flash she was after him.  Chatterer reached the tree first and was up
it like a little red streak.  There he felt safe.  At least, he felt
safe from Black Pussy, for she wouldn’t dare follow him out on the small
branches.  But Farmer Brown’s boy had seen her rush across to the foot
of the tree, and now he stopped chopping wood to watch Black Pussy
glaring up at Chatterer.

"What are you so interested in, Puss?" asked Farmer Brown’s boy. He
couldn’t see Chatterer, because Chatterer was smart enough to keep on
the other side of the tree trunk.  "Is it something you want me to see?"
he continued, and started to walk over to the tree.

Chatterer’s heart was beating terribly with fright—thump, thump, thump!
At just that minute there was a great racket over in the Old Orchard.

"Thief! thief! thief!" screamed Sammy Jay, making a great fuss. Farmer
Brown’s boy turned to look in that direction.

"I wonder if that fox is prowling around again," said he.  And while he
was still looking and wondering, Chatterer dropped to the roof of the
corn-crib and slipped inside, through the hole he had found under the
edge of the roof. He gave a great sigh of relief.

"I believe Sammy Jay did that purposely to make Farmer Brown’s boy look
over there instead of up in the tree," he muttered.  And he was right.
Sammy had no desire to have any real harm come to Chatterer, and so at
just the right minute he had fooled Farmer Brown’s boy, just as he often
had fooled him before by screaming as if he saw Reddy Fox, when Reddy
wasn’t there at all.

When Farmer Brown’s boy was sure that Reddy was not over in the Old
Orchard, he once more turned to Black Pussy, who was still glaring up at
the place where Chatterer had been.  He looked up, too, but of course
there was no one to be seen.

"I guess you must have dreamed you saw something, Puss," said he,
stooping to stroke her gently.  Then he went back to his wood-chopping.
Black Pussy waited a few minutes longer and then went over to the barn
to try to console herself with a mouse.  Chatterer watched his chance
and got back to the old stone wall safely, with his cheeks stuffed full
of corn for Sammy Jay.




                                  *XX*

                    *CHATTERER REMEMBERS SOMETHING*


Chatterer was disgusted with himself, with all his neighbors, and with
the world in general, which is to say that Chatterer was very much put
out about something.  There was no doubt about it.  He couldn’t see
anything cheerful in the sunshine nor anything pleasant in the blue,
blue sky, and when any one fails to see cheerfulness in the sunshine or
to find something pleasant in the blue, blue sky, there is something
wrong in his own heart.  That was the trouble with Chatterer.  There was
a great deal wrong in his heart.

In the first place, it was filled with anger, and anger, you know, will
take all the joy and pleasantness out of anything.  And then Chatterer
was mortified. He was both angry and mortified because Sammy Jay had
proved to have smarter wits than he had.  So, as soon as he could do so
without being seen, he slipped into his new home in the old house of
Drummer the Woodpecker in an apple-tree in the Old Orchard, and there he
sulked for the rest of the day. You see, Sammy Jay had made him go over
to Farmer Brown’s corn-crib and get him some corn right in broad
daylight, and he had very narrowly escaped being seen by Farmer Brown’s
boy.

"If only I hadn’t promised to get him corn whenever he asks me to!" he
said over and over to himself, as he sulked in his home in the
apple-tree. "If only I hadn’t!  And yet I couldn’t help myself—I just
had to.  Now whenever he feels like it, he’ll make me do as he did
to-day and perhaps I won’t always be so lucky.  Oh, dear; oh, dear; I’ve
got myself into a dreadful mess, and I’ve just got to think of some way
out of it."

So all the rest of the day he thought and thought, and the more he
thought the more unhappy he grew.  It wasn’t until just as he was going
out for a breath of air before going to bed for the night that the great
idea came to him.

"Stupid, stupid, stupid!" he muttered, meaning himself.  "Why didn’t I
remember it before?  You won’t see me going over to that corn-crib
again, Mr. Jay!  I’ll get you the corn if I must, but you won’t have the
fun of laughing at me trying to dodge Black Pussy and Farmer Brown’s
boy.  You’re smart, Mr. Jay!  You’re smart, but you’ve got to get up
early in the morning to play such a trick on Chatterer twice."

Right away he felt so much better in his mind that he had a brisk run
along the old stone wall and then turned in for a good night’s sleep.
The next day Sammy Jay appeared in the middle of the forenoon and
demanded more corn. Chatterer pretended that he didn’t dare go for it,
but when Sammy insisted that he must, he suddenly started for—where do
you think?  Why, for that store-house of his in the hollow rail at the
edge of the cornfield.  It was a long way to go, but that was better
than running the risk of being seen by Farmer Brown’s boy.  It took him
some time, but at last he was back with his cheeks stuffed with corn.
Sammy Jay pretended to be cross because he had been kept waiting so long
and grumbled all the time he was eating.  He pretended to think that the
corn was not as good as that from Farmer Brown’s corn-crib and mumbled
something about telling Shadow the Weasel if Chatterer didn’t get him
some corn from the crib the next day.

"You can’t!" cried Chatterer in triumph.  "You promised not to tell
Shadow if I kept my promise and got you corn whenever you asked for it;
but I didn’t say where I would get it," and he chuckled to think that he
had been smarter than Sammy Jay.

Sammy ate every grain and then went off, but as he went, Chatterer
thought he heard something very like a chuckle.  It made him thoughtful
and a little uneasy, but he couldn’t think of any way Sammy could get
the best of him now, so he soon forgot it, and all the rest of the day
he thought of how lucky it was that he had remembered that store-house
in the hollow rail.




                                 *XXI*

                        *SAMMY JAY MAKES A CALL*


Sammy Jay hadn’t had so much fun for a long time as he was having at the
expense of Chatterer the Red Squirrel.  No, Sir, Sammy hadn’t had so
much fun for as long as he could remember.  You see, he and Chatterer
never had been very good friends and always had played sharp tricks on
each other whenever they had the chance.  Sammy had not forgotten how
Chatterer had stolen the eggs of Drummer the Woodpecker in the spring
and then laid the blame on him, so that all the birds of the Old Orchard
had driven him out until they discovered who the real thief was.  Sammy
had never forgotten or forgiven that sharp, mean trick.  And now he was
getting even.  Right down in his heart he didn’t want any real harm to
come to Chatterer, but he did love to see him frightened.  But his
greatest fun was in matching his wits against those of Chatterer, for
you know both have very sharp wits, as scamps are very apt to have.

Now all the time he had been mumbling and finding fault with the corn
Chatterer had brought from his storehouse in the hollow rail on the edge
of the cornfield Sammy had only been pretending.  Yes, Sir, he had
simply been pretending.  You see, he had thought of that store-house
before Chatterer had and had thought Chatterer very stupid not to have
remembered it in the first place.  Now that Chatterer had remembered it,
Sammy was glad, although he pretended not to be.  Why was he glad? Well,
you see, he knew that Chatterer was greatly tickled inside because he
thought that he had proved himself smarter than Sammy, and all the time
Sammy saw another chance to prove to Chatterer that he wasn’t so smart
as he thought himself.

When he left Chatterer, he flew straight to the Green Forest and from
there to the edge of the Green Meadows. His sharp eyes searched the
Green Meadows until they saw his cousin, Blacky the Crow.  Sammy flew
straight over to where Blacky was sitting.  For a few minutes they
talked together, and then both looked over to a tall, lone tree out in
the middle of the Green Meadows, in the top of which sat a black form
very straight and very still.  In fact, to eyes less sharp than those of
Sammy Jay and Blacky the Crow, it would have looked very much like a
part of the tree.  It was Roughleg the Hawk watching for Danny Meadow
Mouse.

[Illustration: Sammy flew straight over to where Blacky was sitting.]

"Will you do it?" asked Sammy. "I don’t dare to myself because he might
have a notion that a fat Jay like me would make him a good dinner."

"Of course I’ll do it," replied Blacky.  "Old Roughleg never bothers me,
and it will be a great joke."

"All right," replied Sammy.  "Be on hand where you can see what happens
to-morrow morning."  And with that, Sammy Jay flew back to the Green
Forest where he could watch.

In a few minutes Blacky the Crow flew over near the tree in which sat
Roughleg the Hawk.  Presently Sammy heard Blacky’s harsh voice.

"Caw, caw, caw," said Blacky.

Sammy smiled.  It was a signal, and he knew that Blacky had done as he
had said he would.  Then Sammy flew off to look for some new mischief
with which to amuse himself for the rest of the day.




                                 *XXII*

                     *CHATTERER HAS A DREADFUL DAY*


Chatterer was feeling quite like himself, his saucy, impudent self, as
he peeped out of his doorway at daylight.  He felt that he had got the
best of Sammy Jay the day before.  To be sure he had to get corn for
Sammy, but he did not have to go to Farmer Brown’s corn-crib for it, and
he knew that it was the fun of seeing him take that risk that Sammy
wanted more than he did the corn.  He felt that he had been smarter than
Sammy, and the feeling made him quite like his old self.

    "Chickaro and chickaree,
      Who is there as smart as me?
    Chickaro and chickaree,
      Sharper wits you’ll never see."


Now that was boasting; and boasting is one of the most foolish habits in
the world.  But Chatterer always was a boaster and probably always will
be. So he whisked in and out of the old stone wall and said this over
and over, while he waited for Sammy Jay to appear.  He had not gone over
to Farmer Brown’s corn-crib this morning for his breakfast, because he
felt sure that Sammy would come and send him for corn, and he knew that
he would have to go.  But he meant to go down to his own store-house in
the hollow rail on the edge of the cornfield and he could eat his fill
there.  So he scampered about and wished that Sammy would hurry up, for
he was hungry.

At last Sammy came, and just as Chatterer expected, he demanded the corn
that Chatterer had promised to get for him whenever he should ask for
it. Right away Chatterer started for the cornfield, running along the
fences. He always did like to run along fences, and though it was a long
way down there, he didn’t mind, for it was a sharp, cold morning and the
run made him feel fine.  As he ran, he kept chuckling to himself to
think how smart he had been to think of that store-house and a way to
keep his promise to Sammy Jay without running any risk to himself.  He
was whisking along the fence on the edge of the cornfield and had almost
reached the hollow rail where he had stored the corn.  He stopped to sit
up on a fence-post and boast once more.

    "Chickaro and chickaree!
      Who is there as smart—"


He didn’t finish.  Instead his tongue seemed to stick to the roof of his
mouth and his little black eyes looked as if they would pop out of his
head.  Sitting on a post close to the hollow rail was a straight, black
form watching him with cruel, hungry-looking eyes.  It was Roughleg the
Hawk!  Chatterer gave a little gasp of fright.  He whirled around and
started back along the fence as fast as he could make his legs go.
Instantly Roughleg spread his great wings and sailed after him.
Chatterer hadn’t gone the length of two rails before Roughleg was over
him.  With his great, cruel claws spread wide, he suddenly swooped down.
Chatterer dodged to the under side of the rail just in time, the very
nick of time.  Roughleg screamed with disappointment, and that scream
had such a fierce sound that Chatterer shivered all over.

[Illustration: Chatterer gave a little gasp of fright.]

How he ever got back to the Old Orchard he hardly knew himself.  Ever so
many times he just managed to dodge those great claws.  But he did get
there at last, out of breath and tired and frightened.  There sat Sammy
Jay, waiting for his corn.  He pretended to be very angry because
Chatterer had none and threatened to go straight to the Green Forest and
tell Shadow the Weasel where Chatterer was living. There was nothing for
Chatterer to do but to go over to the corn-crib as soon as he had rested
a little.

"It’s been a dreadful day, a perfectly dreadful day," said Chatterer to
himself, as he curled up in bed for the night.  "I wonder—I wonder how
old Roughleg happened to be sitting on that fence-post this morning."

But Sammy Jay didn’t wonder; he knew.




                                *XXIII*

                   *CHATTERER HITS ON A PLAN AT LAST*


Each time that Chatterer thought himself smarter than Sammy Jay, he
found that he wasn’t as smart as he thought he was, and this always made
him feel mortified.  He just couldn’t admit even to himself that Sammy
was the smartest, and yet here he was every day bringing corn for Sammy
from Farmer Brown’s corn-crib whenever Sammy told him to, and running
the risk of being seen by Farmer Brown’s boy, all because he hadn’t been
able to think of some way to outwit Sammy.  Once more after he had such
a narrow escape from old Roughleg the Hawk, he had tried going down to
his store-house at the edge of the cornfield, but he had found Roughleg
on watch and had turned back. From the way Sammy Jay had grinned when he
saw Chatterer coming back, Chatterer had made up his mind that Sammy
knew something about how old Roughleg happened to have found out about
that store-house and so been on the watch.

Now all this time, Sammy Jay was having a great deal of fun out of
Chatterer’s trouble.  Each time that Chatterer thought of a plan to
outwit Sammy, he would find that Sammy had already thought of it and a
way to make the plan quite useless.  You see, Sammy used to spend a
great deal of his time when he was alone in the Green Forest pretending
that he was in the same fix as Chatterer and then trying to think of
some way out of it.  So it was that Chatterer never could think of a
plan that Sammy hadn’t already thought of. And yet there was a way to
cheat Sammy out of his fun, though not out of his corn, and it really
was the fun of seeing Chatterer so worried that Sammy cared most about.
Sammy had thought of it almost at once, and it seemed to him that
Chatterer was very, very stupid not to think of it, too.

"He will think of it some day, and I don’t see any way to upset such a
simple plan," said Sammy to himself and then fell to studying some new
way to torment Chatterer.

And at last Chatterer did think of it. It was such a simple plan!
Probably that was why he hadn’t thought of it before.  All he had to do
was to go over to Farmer Brown’s corn-crib at break of day, before any
one in Farmer Brown’s house was awake, just as he had been doing, only
make two or three trips and store a lot of corn in a safe hiding place
in the old stone wall. Then, when Sammy Jay demanded corn, he could get
it without trouble or danger.  He tried it, and it worked splendidly.
Sammy Jay got his corn, but he didn’t get any fun, and he cared more for
the fun of seeing Chatterer in trouble than he did for the corn.  So,
after two or three mornings, Sammy didn’t come up to the Old Orchard,
and Chatterer chuckled as he stored up the corn, not in one place, but
in several places.

Now, while Sammy Jay seemed to have grown tired of corn, he was doing a
lot of thinking.  He had no idea of leaving Chatterer alone.  He had
just got to think of some way of upsetting Chatterer’s simple plan.  It
was Reddy Fox who finally gave him the idea.  He saw Reddy trotting down
the Lone Little Path through the Green Forest, and right away the idea
came to him.  He would tell Reddy where Chatterer was storing the corn
in the old stone wall, and Reddy would hide close by.

"Of course I don’t want Reddy to catch Chatterer, but I can prevent that
by warning him just in time.  But he will be so frightened that he won’t
dare go to that place for corn again in a hurry, and so will have to go
to the corn-crib for it," thought Sammy, and hurried to tell Reddy Fox
about the place half way along the old stone wall where Chatterer had
hidden his corn.




                                 *XXIV*

                   *CHATTERER HAS HIS TURN TO LAUGH*


Sammy Jay had not been up to the Old Orchard for several days, and
Chatterer the Red Squirrel was beginning to wonder if Sammy had grown
tired of corn.  But Chatterer had learned that it is always best to be
prepared, and so every morning, when he had visited Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib, he had brought a generous supply back to the Old Orchard and
hidden it in several secret places in different parts of the stone wall
and some in a certain hollow in an old apple-tree.  Chatterer couldn’t
quite believe that Sammy had given up all hope of making him more
trouble, so he meant to be prepared.

So when Sammy did appear early one morning, Chatterer was not in the
least surprised.  He pretended to be glad to see Sammy.  In fact, he was
almost glad.  You see, Sammy had so many times proved his wits to be
sharper than Chatterer’s, that Chatterer wanted to get even.  There was
a sparkle of mischief in Sammy’s eyes.  Chatterer saw it right away, and
he guessed that Sammy had some new plan under that pert cap of his.

"Good morning, Sammy Jay," said Chatterer, pretending to be polite.  "I
had begun to think that you were tired of corn.  I have some very nice
corn ready for you, the very best I could find in Farmer Brown’s
corn-crib.  Will you have some this morning?"

"I believe I will," replied Sammy, also pretending to be very polite.
"It is very nice of you to pick out the best corn for me, and the very
thought of it makes me hungry.  I believe I would like some this very
minute."

As he spoke, he turned his head to hide a grin, for, thought he, "of
course Chatterer will go straight to that hiding place in the stone wall
and then we shall see some fun."  He glanced hastily in that direction,
and he saw a patch of red half hidden behind the wall, and he knew that
it was the red coat of Reddy Fox.  Reddy was hiding just where Sammy had
told him to.

Now Chatterer had been doing some quick thinking.  He remembered the
sharp tricks Sammy had played on him before, and he didn’t have the
least doubt that Sammy had planned another.  "Of course, he expects me
to go straight to that place where he knows I have hidden corn for him,
and if he has planned any trouble for me, that is where it will be,"
thought Chatterer. "I think I’ll get the corn from one of the hiding
places he doesn’t know about."

With that Chatterer ran swiftly out along a branch of the tree he was
in, leaped across to another tree and then to a third, the one in which
was the hollow in which he had put some of the corn.  In a few minutes
he was back, with his cheeks stuffed full.  Sammy Jay pretended to be
very much pleased, but he ate it as if he had lost his appetite, as
indeed he had.  You see, he was wondering what he should say to Reddy
Fox, to whom he had promised a chance to catch Chatterer.  He knew that
Reddy would think that it was all one of Sammy’s tricks.  So without
waiting to finish all the corn, Sammy politely said good-by and flew
away to the deepest part of the Green Forest.

"Ha, ha, ha!  Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Chatterer, as his sharp eyes spied
Reddy Fox, trying to creep away without being seen.  "Ha, ha, ha!  Ho,
ho, ho!  It’s my turn to laugh.  Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho!"

And so for the time being Chatterer had the last laugh, though Sammy Jay
knew well that his turn would come again, if only he were patient.  But
he had other things to think of.  You see, he was very much interested
in the adventures of Buster Bear.  And if you are interested in them
too, you may read all about them in another book devoted wholly to the
things that happened when Buster came to live in the Green Forest.




                                THE END




           *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *




                               *BOOKS BY*

                         *THORNTON W. BURGESS*


                         *BEDTIME STORY-BOOKS*

                           THE ADVENTURES OF:

1. REDDY FOX
2. JOHNNY CHUCK
3. PETER COTTONTAIL
4. UNC’ BILLY POSSUM
5. MR. MOCKER
6. JERRY MUSKRAT
7. DANNY MEADOW MOUSE
8. GRANDFATHER FROG
9. CHATTERER, THE RED SQUIRREL
10. SAMMY JAY
11. BUSTER BEAR
12. OLD MR. TOAD
13. PRICKLY PORKY
14. OLD MAN COYOTE
15. PADDY THE BEAVER
16. POOR MRS. QUACK
17. BOBBY COON
18. JIMMY SKUNK
19. BOB WHITE
20. OL’ MISTAH BUZZARD


                       *MOTHER WEST WIND SERIES*

1. OLD MOTHER WEST WIND
2. MOTHER WEST WIND’S CHILDREN
3. MOTHER WEST WIND’S ANIMAL FRIENDS
4. MOTHER WEST WIND’S NEIGHBORS
5. MOTHER WEST WIND "WHY" STORIES
6. MOTHER WEST WIND "HOW" STORIES
7. MOTHER WEST WIND "WHEN" STORIES
8. MOTHER WEST WIND "WHERE" STORIES


                         *GREEN MEADOW SERIES*

1. HAPPY JACK
2. MRS. PETER RABBIT
3. BOWSER THE HOUND
4. OLD GRANNY Fox


                         *GREEN FOREST SERIES*

1. LIGHTFOOT THE DEER
2. BLACKY THE CROW
3. WHITEFOOT THE WOOD MOUSE
4. BUSTER BEAR’S TWINS


                         *WISHING-STONE SERIES*

1. TOMMY AND THE WISHING-STONE
2. TOMMY’S WISHES COME TRUE
3. TOMMY’S CHANGE OF HEART


THE BURGESS BIRD BOOK FOR CHILDREN
THE BURGESS ANIMAL BOOK FOR CHILDREN
THE BURGESS FLOWER BOOK FOR CHILDREN






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF SAMMY JAY ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/43596

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away – you may do practically _anything_ with public domain
eBooks.  Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially
commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use &amp; Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you
paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this
agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you
paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See
paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in
the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you
from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works
by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms
of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated
with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg™ work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning the
copyright status of any work in any country outside the United States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on
which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed,
viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with
the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work,
you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through
1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless
you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
    already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
    the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
    donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
    days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
    required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
    should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
    “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
    Archive Foundation.”

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
    You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
    works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
    all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but
not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription
errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a
defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES – Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability
to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE
THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR
UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT,
INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE
NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND – If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY – You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals
and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely
available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn
more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how
your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page
at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless
a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks
in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
