The Project Gutenberg EBook of Myths and Dreams, by Edward Clodd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Myths and Dreams

Author: Edward Clodd

Release Date: September 26, 2013 [EBook #43813]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS AND DREAMS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)









MYTHS AND DREAMS




  MYTHS AND DREAMS


  BY EDWARD CLODD

  AUTHOR OF
  ‘THE CHILDHOOD OF THE WORLD,’
  ‘THE STORY OF CREATION,’ ETC.


  _SECOND EDITION, REVISED_


  London
  CHATTO &amp; WINDUS, PICCADILLY
  1891




TO RICHARD A. PROCTOR, B.A.,

AUTHOR OF ‘THE SUN,’ ‘OTHER WORLDS,’ ETC., EDITOR OF ‘KNOWLEDGE.’

MY DEAR PROCTOR--The best gifts of life are its friendships, and to you,
with whom friendship has ripened into fellowship, and under whose
editorial wing some of the chapters of this book had temporary shelter, I
inscribe them in their enlarged and independent form.

  Yours sincerely,
    EDWARD CLODD.




PREFACE.


The object of this book is to present in compendious form the evidence
which myths and dreams supply as to primitive man’s interpretation of his
own nature and of the external world, and more especially to indicate how
such evidence carries within itself the history of the origin and growth
of beliefs in the supernatural.

The examples are selected chiefly from barbaric races, as furnishing the
nearest correspondences to the working of the mind in what may be called
its “eocene” stage, but examples are also cited from civilised races, as
witnessing to that continuity of ideas which is obscured by familiarity or
ignored by prejudice.

Had more illustrations been drawn from sources alike prolific, the
evidence would have been swollen to undue dimensions without increasing
its significance; as it is, repetition has been found needful here and
there, under the difficulty of entirely detaching the arguments advanced
in the two parts of this work.

Man’s development, physical and psychical, has been fully treated by Mr.
Herbert Spencer, Dr. Tylor, and other authorities, to whom students of the
subject are permanent debtors, but that subject is so many-sided, so
far-reaching, whether in retrospect or prospect, that its subdivision is
of advantage so long as we do not permit our sense of inter-relation to be
dulled thereby.

My own line of argument will be found to run for the most part parallel
with that of the above-named writers; there are divergences along the
route, but we reach a common terminus.

The footnotes indicate the principal works which have been consulted in
preparing this book, but I desire to express my special thanks to Mr.
Andrew Lang for his kindness in reading the proofs, and for suggestions
which, in the main, I have been glad to adopt.

E. C.

  ROSEMONT, TUFNELL PARK,
    LONDON, _March 1885_.




CONTENTS.


  PART I.

  MYTH: ITS BIRTH AND GROWTH.

  SECTION                                                             PAGE

     I. ITS PRIMITIVE MEANING                                            3

    II. CONFUSION OF EARLY THOUGHT BETWEEN THE LIVING AND THE
        NOT LIVING                                                      12

   III. PERSONIFICATION OF THE POWERS OF NATURE                         19
          (_a._) The Sun and Moon                                       19
          (_b._) The Stars                                              29
          (_c._) The Earth and Sky                                      34
          (_d._) Storm and Lightning, etc.                              41
          (_e._) Light and Darkness                                     48
          (_f._) The Devil                                              53

    IV. THE SOLAR THEORY OF MYTH                                        61

     V. BELIEF IN METAMORPHOSIS INTO ANIMALS                            81

    VI. TOTEMISM: BELIEF IN DESCENT FROM ANIMAL OR PLANT                99

   VII. SURVIVAL OF MYTH IN HISTORY                                    114

  VIII. MYTH AMONG THE HEBREWS                                         131

    IX. CONCLUSION                                                     137


  PART II.

  DREAMS: THEIR PLACE IN THE GROWTH OF BELIEFS IN THE SUPERNATURAL.

  SECTION                                                             PAGE

     I. DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SAVAGE AND CIVILISED MAN                    143

    II. LIMITATIONS OF BARBARIC LANGUAGE                               148

   III. BARBARIC CONFUSION BETWEEN NAMES AND THINGS                    154

    IV. BARBARIC BELIEF IN VIRTUE IN INANIMATE THINGS                  160

     V. BARBARIC BELIEF IN THE REALITY OF DREAMS                       168

    VI. BARBARIC THEORY OF DISEASE                                     174

   VII. BARBARIC THEORY OF A SECOND SELF OR SOUL                       182

  VIII. BARBARIC PHILOSOPHY IN “PUNCHKIN” AND ALLIED STORIES           188

    IX. BARBARIC AND CIVILISED NOTIONS OF THE SOUL’S NATURE            198

     X. BARBARIC BELIEF IN SOULS IN BRUTES AND PLANTS AND
        LIFELESS THINGS                                                207

    XI. BARBARIC AND CIVILISED NOTIONS ABOUT THE SOUL’S
        DWELLING PLACE                                                 215

   XII. CONCLUSIONS FROM THE FOREGOING                                 222

  XIII. DREAMS AS OMENS AND MEDIA OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN GODS
        AND MEN                                                        236

        INDEX                                                          245




I.

MYTH: ITS BIRTH AND GROWTH.


“Unchecked by external truth, the mind of man has a fatal facility for
ensnaring, entrapping, and entangling itself. But, happily, happily for
the human race, some fragment of physical speculation has been built into
every false system. Here is the weak point. Its inevitable destruction
leaves a breach in the whole fabric, and through that breach the armies of
truth march in.”

Sir H. S. MAINE.


MYTH: ITS BIRTH AND GROWTH.


§ I.

ITS PRIMITIVE MEANING.

It is barely thirty years ago since the world was startled by the
publication of Buckle’s _History of Civilisation_, with its theory that
human actions are the effect of causes as fixed and regular as those which
operate in the universe; climate, soil, food, and scenery being the chief
conditions determining progress.

That book was a _tour de force_, not a lasting contribution to the
question of man’s mental development. The publication of Darwin’s
epoch-making _Origin of Species_[1] showed wherein it fell short; how the
importance of the above-named causes was exaggerated and the existence of
equally potent causes overlooked. Buckle probably had not read Herbert
Spencer’s _Social Statics_, and he knew nothing of the profound revolution
in silent preparation in the quiet of Darwin’s home; otherwise, his book
must have been rewritten. This would have averted the oblivion from which
not even its charm of style can rescue it. Its brilliant but defective
theories are obscured in the fuller light of that doctrine of descent with
modifications by which we learn that external circumstances do not alone
account for the widely divergent types of men, so that a superior race, in
supplanting an inferior one, will change the face and destiny of a
country, “making the solitary place to be glad, and the desert to rejoice
and blossom as the rose.” Darwin has given us the clue to those subtle and
still obscure causes which bring about, stage by stage, the unseen
adaptations to requirements varying a type and securing its survival, and
which have resulted in the evolution of the manifold species of living
things. The notion of a constant relation between man and his surroundings
is therefore untenable.

But incomplete as is Buckle’s theory, and all-embracing as is Darwin’s, so
far as organic life is concerned, the larger issue is raised by both, and
for most men whose judgment is worth anything it is settled. Either man is
a part of nature or he is not. If he is not, there is an end of the
matter, since the materials lie beyond human grasp, and cannot be examined
and placed in order for comparative study. Let Christian, Brahman,
Bushman, and South Sea Islander each hold fast his “form of sound words”
about man’s origin. One is as good as another where all are irrational and
beyond proof. But if he is, then the inquiry concerning him may not stop
at the anatomy of his body and the assignment of his place in the
succession of life on the globe. His relation, materially, to the
simplest, shapeless specks of living matter; structurally, to the highest
and more complex organisms, is demonstrated; the natural history of him is
clear. This, however, is physical, and for us the larger question is
psychical. The theory of evolution must embrace the genesis and
development of mind, and therefore of ideas, beliefs, and speculations
about things seen and unseen.

In the correction of our old definitions a wider meaning must be given to
the word _myth_ than that commonly found in the dictionaries. Opening any
of these at random we find myth explained as fable, as something
designedly fictitious, whether for amusement only, or to point a moral.
The larger meaning which it holds to-day includes much more than this--to
wit, the whole area of intellectual products which lie beyond the historic
horizon and overlap it, effacing on nearer view the lines of separation.
For the myth, as fable only, has no place for the crude fancies and
grotesque imaginings of barbarous races of the present day, and of races
at low levels of culture in the remote past. And so long as it was looked
upon as the vagrant of fancy, with no serious meaning at the heart of it,
and as corresponding to no yearning of man after the truth of things,
sober treatment of it was impossible. But now that myth, with its prolific
offspring, legend and tradition, is seen to be a necessary travailing
through which the mind of man passed in its slow progress towards
certitude, the study and comparison of its manifold, yet, at the centre,
allied forms, and of the conditions out of which they arose, takes rank
among the serious inquiries of our time.

Not that the inquiry is a new one. The limits of this book forbid detailed
references to the successive stages of that inquiry--in other words, to
the pre-Christian, patristic, and pseudo-scientific theories of myth which
remained unchallenged, or varied only in non-essential features, till the
rise of comparative mythology. But apology for such omission here is the
less needful, since the list of ancient and modern vagaries would have the
monotony of a catalogue. However unlike on the surface, they are
fundamentally the same, being the products of non-critical ages, and one
and all vitiated by assumptions concerning gods and men which are to us as
“old wives’ fables.”

In short, between these empirical theories and the scientific method of
inquiry into the meaning of myth there can be no relation. Because, for
the assigning of its due place in the order of man’s mental and spiritual
development to myth, there is needed that knowledge concerning his origin,
concerning the conditions out of which he has emerged, and concerning the
mythologies of lower races and their survival in unsuspected forms in the
higher races, which was not only beyond reach, but also beyond conception,
until this century.

Except, therefore, as curiosities of literature, we may dismiss the
Lemprière of our school-days, and with him “Causabon”-Bryant and his
symbolism of the ark and traces of the Flood in everything. Their keys,
Arkite and Ophite, fit no lock, and with them we must, in all respect be
it added, dismiss Mr. Gladstone, with his visions of the Messiah in
Apollo, and of the Logos in Athênê.

The main design of this book is to show that in what is for convenience
called _myth_ lie the germs of philosophy, theology, and science, the
beginnings of all knowledge that man has attained or ever will attain, and
therefore that in myth we have his serious endeavour to interpret the
meaning of his surroundings and of his own actions and feelings. In its
unbroken sequence we have the explanation of his most cherished and now,
for the most part, discredited beliefs, the persistence of which makes it
essential and instructive not to deal with the primitive myth apart from
its later and more complex phases. Myth was the product of man’s emotion
and imagination, acted upon by his surroundings, and it carries the traces
of its origin in its more developed forms, as the ancestral history of the
higher organisms is embodied in their embryos. Man wondered before he
reasoned. Awe and fear are quick to express themselves in rudimentary
worship; hence the myth was at the outset a theology, and the gradations
from personifying to deifying are too faint to be traced. Thus blended,
the one as inevitable outcome of the other, they cannot well be treated
separately, as if the myth were earth-born and the theology heaven-sent.
And to treat them as one is to invade no province of religion, which is
quite other than speculation about gods. The awe and reverence which the
fathomless mystery of the universe awakens, which steal within us unbidden
as the morning light, and unbroken on the prism of analysis; the
conviction, deepening as we peer, that there is a Power beyond humanity,
and upon which humanity depends; the feeling that life is in harmony with
the Divine order when it moves in disinterested service of our kind--these
theology can neither create nor destroy, neither verify nor disprove. They
can be bound within no formula that man or church has invented, but
undefined

  “Are yet the fountain life of all our day,
   Are yet a master light of all our seeing.”

At what epoch in man’s history we are to place the development of the
myth-making faculty must remain undetermined. It is of course coincident
with the dawn of thought. We cannot credit the nameless savage of the
Ancient Stone Age with it. If he had brains and leisure enough to make
guesses about things, he has left us no witness of the fact. His relics,
and those of his successors to a period which is but as yesterday in the
history of our kind, are material only; and not until we possess the
symbols of his thought, whether in language or rude picture, do we get an
inkling of the meaning which the universe had for him, in the details of
his pitiless daily life, in the shapes and motions of surrounding
objects, and in the majesty of the heavens above him. Even then the
thought is more or less crystallised, and if we would watch it in the
fluent form we must have a keen eye for the like process going on among
savages yet untouched by the Time-spirit, although higher in the scale
than the Papuans and hill tribes of the Vindhya. Although we cannot so far
lull our faculty of thought as to realise the mental vacuity of the
savage, we may, from survivals nowadays, lead up to reasonable guesses of
savage ways of looking at things in bygone ages, and the more so when we
can detect relics of these among the ignorant and superstitious of modern
times.

What meaning, then, had man’s surroundings to him, when eye and ear could
be diverted from prior claims of the body, and he could repose from
watching for his prey, and from listening to the approach of wild beast or
enemy? He had the advantage, from greater demand for their exercise, in
keener senses of sight, hearing, smell, and touch, than we enjoy; nor did
he fail to take in facts in plenty. But there was this vital defect and
difference, that in his brains every fact was pigeon-holed, charged with
its own narrow meaning only, as in small minds among ourselves we find
place given to inane peddling details, and no advance made to general and
wide conception of things. In sharpest contrast to the poet’s utterance:

  “Nothing in this world is single,
     All things by a law divine
   In one another’s being mingle,”

every fact is unrelated to every other fact, and therefore interpreted
wrongly.

Man, in his first outlook upon nature, was altogether ignorant of the
character of the forces by which he was environed; ignorant of that
unvarying relation between effect and cause which it needed the experience
of ages and the generalisations therefrom to apprehend, and to express as
“laws of nature.” He had not even the intellectual resource of later times
in inventing miracle to explain where the necessary relation between
events seemed broken or absent.

His first attitude was that of wonder, mingled with fear--fear as
instinctive as the dread of the brute for him. The sole measure of things
was himself, consequently everything that moved or that had power of
movement did so because it was alive. A personal life and will was
attributed to sun, moon, clouds, river, waterfall, ocean, and tree, and
the varying phenomena of the sky at dawn or noonday, at gray eve or
black-clouded night, were the manifestation of the controlling life that
dwelt in all. In a thousand different forms this conception was expressed.
The thunder was the roar of a mighty beast; the lightning a serpent
darting at its prey, an angry eye flashing, the storm demon’s outshot
forked tongue; the rainbow a thirsty monster; the waterspout a long-tailed
dragon. This was not a pretty or powerful conceit, not imagery, but an
explanation. The men who thus spoke of these phenomena meant precisely
what they said. What does the savage know about heat, light, sound,
electricity, and the other modes of motion through which the
Proteus-force beyond our ken is manifest? How many persons who have
enjoyed a “liberal” education can give correct answers, if asked off-hand,
explaining how glaciers are born of the sunshine, and why two sounds,
travelling in opposite directions at equal velocities, interfere and cause
silence? The percentage of young men, hailing from schools of renown, who
give the most ludicrous replies when asked the cause of day and night, and
the distance of the earth from the sun, is by no means small.

Whilst the primary causes determining the production of myths are uniform,
the secondary causes, due in the main to different physical surroundings,
vary, bringing about unlikeness in subject and detail. Nevertheless, in
grouping the several classes of myths, those are obviously to be placed
prominently which embrace explanations of the origin of things, from sun
and star to man and insect, involving ideas about the powers to whom all
things are attributed. But in this book no exhaustive treatment is
possible, only some indication of the general lines along which the
myth-making faculty has advanced, and for this purpose a few illustrations
of barbaric mental confusion between the living and the not living are
chosen at the outset. They will, moreover, prepare us for the large
element of the irrational present in barbaric myth, and supply a key to
the survival of this in the mythologies of civilised races.


§ II.

CONFUSION OF EARLY THOUGHT BETWEEN THE LIVING AND THE NOT LIVING.

In selecting from the literature of savage mythology the material
overburdens us by its richness. Much of it is old, and, like refuse-heaps
in our mining districts once cast aside as rubbish but now made to yield
products of value, has, after long neglect, been found to contain elements
of worth, which patience and insight have extracted from its travellers’
tales and quaint speculations. That for which it was most prized in the
days of our fathers is now of small account; that within it which they
passed by we secure as of lasting worth. Much of that literature is,
however, new, for the impetus which has in our time been given to the
rescue and preservation of archaic forms has reached this, and a host of
accomplished collectors have secured rich specimens of relics which, in
the lands of their discovery, have still the authority of the past,
unimpaired by the critical exposure of the present.

The subject itself is, moreover, so wide reaching, bringing the ancient
and the modern into hitherto unsuspected relation, showing how in customs
and beliefs, to us unmeaning and irrational, there lurk the degraded
representations of old philosophies, and in what seems to us burlesque,
the survivals of man’s most serious thought.

One feels this difficulty of choice and this temptation to digress in
treating of the confusion inherent in the savage mind between things
living and not living, arising from superficial analogies and its
attribution of life and power to lifeless things. The North American
Indians prefer a hook that has caught a big fish to the handful of hooks
that have never been tried, and they never lay two nets together lest they
should be jealous of each other. The Bushmen thought that the traveller
Chapman’s big waggon was the mother of his smaller ones; and the natives
of Tahiti sowed in the ground some iron nails given them by Captain Cook,
expecting to obtain young ones. When that ill-fated discoverer’s ship was
sighted by the New Zealanders they thought it was a whale with wings. The
king of the Coussa Kaffirs having broken off a piece of the anchor of a
stranded ship soon afterwards died, upon which all the Kaffirs made a
point of saluting the anchor very respectfully whenever they went near it,
regarding it as a vindictive being. But perhaps one of the most striking
and amusing illustrations is that quoted by Sir John Lubbock from the
_Smithsonian Reports_ concerning an Indian who had been sent by a
missionary to a colleague with four loaves of bread, accompanied by a
letter stating their number. The Indian ate some of the bread, and his
theft was, of course, found out. He was sent on a second errand with a
similar batch of bread and a letter, and repeated the theft, but took the
precaution to hide the letter under a stone while he was eating the
loaves, so that it might not see him! As the individual is a type of the
race, so in the child’s nature we find analogy of the mental attitude of
the savage ready to hand. To the child everything is alive. With what
timidity and wonder he first touches a watch, with its moving hands and
clicking works; with what genuine anger he beats the door against which he
has knocked his head, whips the rocking-horse that has thrown him, then
kisses and strokes it the next moment in token of forgiveness and
affection.

  “As children of weak age
     Lend life to the dumb stones
   Whereon to vent their rage,
     And bend their little fists, and rate
         the senseless ground.”[2]

Even among civilised adults, as Mr. Grote remarks, “the force of momentary
passion will often suffice to supersede the acquired habit, and an
intelligent man may be impelled in a moment of agonising pain to kick or
beat the lifeless object from which he has suffered.” The mental condition
which causes the wild native of Brazil to bite the stone he stumbled over
may, as Dr. Tylor has pointed out in his invaluable _Primitive Culture_,
be traced along the course of history not merely in impulsive habit, but
in formally enacted law. If among barbarous peoples we find, for example,
the relatives of a man killed by a fall from a tree taking their revenge
by cutting the tree down and scattering it in chips, we find a continuity
of idea in the action of the court of justice held at the Prytaneum in
Athens to try any inanimate object, such as an axe, or a piece of wood or
stone, which has caused the death of any one without proved human agency,
and which, if condemned, was cast in solemn form beyond the border. “The
spirit of this remarkable procedure reappears in the old English law,
repealed only in the present reign, whereby not only a beast that kills a
man, but a cart-wheel that runs over him, or a tree that falls on him and
kills him, is deodand or given to God, _i.e._ forfeited and sold for the
poor.” Among ancient legal proceedings at Laon we read of animals
condemned to the gallows for the crime of murder, and of swarms of
caterpillars which infected certain districts being admonished by the
Courts of Troyes in 1516 to take themselves off within a given number of
days, on pain of being declared accursed and excommunicated.[3]

Barbaric confusion in the existence of transferable qualities in things,
as when the New Zealander swallows his dead enemy’s eye that he may see
farther, or gives his child pebbles to make it stony and pitiless of
heart; and as when the Abipone eats tiger’s flesh to increase his courage,
has its survival in the old wives’ notion that the eye-bright flower,
which resembles the eye, is good for diseases of that organ, in the
mediæval remedy for curing a sword wound by nursing the weapon that caused
it, and in the old adage, “Take a hair of the dog that bit you.” As
illustrating this, Dr. Dennys[4] tells a story of a missionary in China
whose big dog would now and again slightly bite children as he passed
through the villages. In such a case the mother would run after him and
beg for a hair from the dog’s tail, which would be put to the part bitten,
or when the missionary would say jocosely, “Oh! take a hair from the dog
yourself,” the woman would decline, and ask him to spit in her hand, which
itself witnesses to the widespread belief in the mystical properties of
saliva.[5] Among ourselves this survives, degraded enough, in the cabmen’s
and boatmen’s habit of spitting on the fare paid them. _Treacle_ (Greek
_thēriake_, from _thērion_, a name given to the viper) witnesses to the
old-world superstition that viper’s flesh is an antidote to the viper’s
bite. Philips, in his _World of Words_, defines treacle as a “physical
compound made of vipers and other ingredients,” and this medicament was a
favourite against all poisons. The word then became applied to any
confection or sweet syrup, and finally and solely to the syrup of
molasses.

The practice of burning or hanging in effigy, by which a crowd expresses
its feelings towards an unpopular person, is a relic of the old belief in
a real and sympathetic connection between a man and his image; a belief
extant among the unlettered in by-places of civilised countries. When we
hear of North American tribes making images of their foes, whose lives
they expect to shorten by piercing those images with their arrows, we
remember that these barbarous folk have their representatives among us in
the Devonshire peasant, who hangs in his chimney a pig’s heart stuck all
over with thorn-prickles, so that the heart of his enemy may likewise be
pierced. The custom among the Dyaks of Borneo of making a wax figure of
the foe, so that his body may waste away as the wax is melted, will remind
the admirers of Dante Rossetti how he finds in a kindred mediæval
superstition the subject of his poem “Sister Helen,” while they who prefer
the authority of sober prose may turn to that storehouse of the curious,
Brand’s _Popular Antiquities_. Brand quotes from King James, who, in his
_Dæmonology_, book ii. chap. 5, tells us that “the devil teacheth how to
make pictures of wax or clay, that by roasting thereof the persons that
they bear the name of may be continually melted or dried away by continual
sickness;” and also cites Andrews, the author of a _Continuation of
Henry’s Great Britain_, who, speaking of the death of Ferdinand, Earl of
Derby, by poison, in the reign of Elizabeth, says, “The credulity of the
age attributed his death to witchcraft. The disease was odd, and operated
as a perpetual emetic; and a waxen image, with hair like that of the
unfortunate earl, found in his chamber, reduced every suspicion to
certainty.” A century and half before this the Duchess of Gloucester did
penance for conspiring with certain necromancers against the life of Henry
VI. by melting a waxen image of him, while, as hinging the centuries
together, “only recently a _corp cré_, or clay image, stuck full of birds’
claws, bones, pins, and similar objects, was found in one of the
Inverness-shire rivers. It was a fetish which, as it dissolved away by the
action of the stream, was supposed to involve the ‘wearing away’ of the
person it was intended to represent.”[6] The passage from practices born
of such beliefs to the use of charms as protectives against the
evil-disposed and those in league with the devil, and as cures for divers
diseases, is obvious. Upon this it is not needful to dwell; the
superstitious man is on the same plane as the savage, but, save in rare
instances, without such excuse for remaining, as Bishop Hall puts it, with
“old wives and starres as his counsellors, charms as his physicians, and a
little hallowed wax as his antidote for all evils.”

But we have travelled in brief space a long way from our picture of man,
weaving out of streams and breezes and the sunshine his crude philosophy
of personal life and will controlling all, to the peasant of to-day, his
intellectual lineal descendant, with his belief in signs and wonders, his
forecast of fate and future by omens, by dreams, and by such pregnant
occurrences as the spilling of salt, the howling of dogs, and changes of
the moon; in short, by the great mass of superstitions which yet more or
less influence the intelligent, terrorise the ignorant, and delight the
student of human development.


§ III.

PERSONIFICATION OF THE POWERS OF NATURE.

(_a._) _The Sun and Moon._

A good deal hinges upon the evidences in savage myth-making of the
personification of the powers of nature. Obviously, the richest and most
suggestive material would be supplied by the striking phenomena of the
heavens, chiefly in sunrise and sunset, in moon, star, star-group and
meteor, cloud and storm, and, next in importance, by the strange and
terrible among phenomena on earth, whether in the restless waters, the
unquiet trees, the grotesquely-shaped rocks, and the fear inspired in man
by creatures more powerful than himself. Through the whole range of the
lower culture, sun, moon, and constellations are spoken of as living
creatures, often as ancestors, heroes, and benefactors who have departed
to the country above, to heaven, the _heaved_, up-lifted land. The Tongans
of the South Pacific say that two ancestors quarrelled respecting the
parentage of the first-born of the woman Papa, each claiming the child as
his own. No King Solomon appears to have been concerned in the dispute,
although at last the infant was cut in two. Vatea, the husband of Papa,
took the upper part as his share, and forthwith squeezed it into a ball
and tossed it into the heavens, where it became the sun. Tonga-iti
sullenly allowed the lower half to remain a day or two on the ground,
but, seeing the brightness of Vatea’s half, he compressed his share into a
ball and tossed it into the dark sky, during the absence of the sun in the
nether world. Thus originated the moon, whose paleness is owing to the
blood having all drained out of Tonga-iti’s half as it lay upon the
ground. Mr. Gill, from whose valuable collection of southern myth this is
quoted, says that it seems to have its origin in the allegory of an
alternating embrace of the fair Earth by Day and Night. But despite the
explanations, more or less strained, which some schools of comparative
mythologists find for every myth, the savage is not a conscious weaver of
allegories, or an embryo Cabalist, and we shall find ourselves more in
accord with the laws of his intellectual growth if, instead of delving for
recondite and subtle meanings in his simple-sounding explanations of
things, we take the meaning to be that which lies on the surface. More on
this, however, anon. Among the Red races one tribe thought that sun, moon,
and stars were men and women who went into the sea every night and swam
out by the east. The Bushmen say that the sun was once a man who shed
light from his body, but only for a short distance, until some children
threw him into the sky while he slept, and thus he shines upon the wide
earth. The Australians say that all was darkness around them till one of
their many ancestors, who still shine from the stars, shedding good and
evil, threw, in pity for them, an emu’s egg into space, when it became the
sun. Among the Manacicas of Brazil, the sun was their culture-hero,
virgin-born, and their jugglers, who claimed power to fly through the air,
said that his luminous figure, as that of a man, could be seen by them,
although too dazzling for common mortals.

The sun has been stayed in his course in other places than Gibeon,
although by mechanical means of which Joshua appears to have been
independent. Among the many exploits of Maui, abounding in Polynesian
myth, are those of his capture of the sun. He had, like Prometheus,
snatched fire from heaven for mortals, and his next task was to cure Ra,
the sun-god, of his trick of setting before the day’s work was done. So
Maui plaited thick ropes of cocoa-nut fibre, and taking them to the
opening through which Ra climbed up from the nether world, he laid a
slip-noose for him, placing the other ropes at intervals along his path.
Lying in wait as Ra neared, he pulled the first rope, but the noose only
caught Ra’s feet. Nor could Maui stop him until he reached the sixth rope,
when he was caught round the neck and pulled so tightly by Maui that he
had to come to terms, and agree to slacken his pace for the future. Maui,
however, took the precaution to keep the ropes on him, and they may still
be seen hanging from the sun at dawn and eve. In Tahitian myth Maui is a
priest, who, in building a house which must be finished by daylight,
seizes the sun by its rays and binds it to a tree till the house is built.
In North American myth a boy had snared the sun, and there was no light on
the earth. So the beasts held council who should undertake the perilous
task of cutting the cord, when the dormouse, then the biggest among them,
volunteered. And it succeeded, but so scorched was it by the heat that it
was shrivelled to the smallest of creatures. Such a group of myths is not
easy of explanation; but when we find the sun regarded as an ancestor, and
as one bound, mill-horse like, to a certain course, the notion of his
control and check would arise, and the sun-catchers take their place in
tradition among those who have deserved well of their race. It is one
among numberless aspects under which the doings of the sun and of other
objects in nature are depicted as the doings of mortals, and the crude
conceptions of the Ojibwas and the Samoans find their parallel in the
mythologies of our Aryan ancestors. Only in the former we see the mighty
one shorn of his dignity, with noose round his neck or chains on either
side; whilst in the latter we see him as Herakles, with majesty
unimpaired, carrying out the twelve tasks imposed by Eurystheus, and thus
winning for himself a place among the immortals.

The names given to the sun in mythology are as manifold as his aspects and
influences, and as the moods of the untutored minds that endowed him with
the complex and contrary qualities which make up the nature of man. _Him_,
we say, not _it_, thus preserving in our common speech a relic not only of
the universal personification of things, but of their division into sex.

The origin of gender is most obscure, but its investment of both animate
and inanimate things with sexual qualities shows it to be a product of
the mythopœic stage of man’s progress, and demands some reference in these
pages. The languages of savages are in a constant state of flux, even the
most abiding terms, as numerals and personal pronouns, being replaced by
others in a few years. And the changes undergone by civilised speech have
so rubbed away and obscured its primitive forms that, look where he may,
the poverty of the old materials embarrasses the inquirer. If the similar
endings to such undoubtedly early words as father, mother, brother,
sister, in our own and other related languages, notably Sanskrit, afford
any clue, it goes rather to show that gender was a later feature than one
might think. But there is no uniformity in the matter. It seems pretty
clear that in the early forms of our Indo-European speech there were two
genders only, masculine and feminine. The assignment of certain things
conceived of as sexless to neither gender, _neutrius generis_, is of later
origin. Some of the languages derived from Latin, and, to name one of a
different family, the Hebrew, have no neuter gender, whilst others, as the
ancient Turkish and Finnish, have no grammatical gender. In our own, under
the organic changes incident to its absorption of Norman and other foreign
elements, gender has practically disappeared (although ships and nations
are still spoken of as feminine), the pronouns _he_, _she_, _it_, being
its representatives. Such a gain is apparent when we take up the study of
the ancestral Anglo-Saxon, with its masculine, feminine, and neuter
nouns, or of our allied German with its perplexities of sex, as, _e.g._,
its masculine spoon, its feminine fork, and its neuter knife. Turning for
a moment to such slight aid as barbaric speech gives, we find in the
languages of the hill tribes of South India a curious distinction made;
rational beings, as gods and men, being grouped in a “high-caste or major
gender,” and living animals and lifeless things in a “casteless or minor
gender.” The languages of some North American and South African tribes
make a distinction into animate and inanimate gender; but as non-living
things, the sun, the thunder, the lightning, are regarded as persons, they
are classed in the animate gender.

Further research into the radicals of so relatively fixed a language as
Chinese, and into more mobile languages related to it, may, perhaps,
enlighten the present ignorance; but one thing is certain, that language
was “once the scene of an immense personification,” and has thereby added
vitality to myth. Analogies and conceptions apparent to barbaric man, and
in no way occurring to us, caused him to attribute sexual qualities not
only to dead as to living things, but to their several parts, as well as,
in the course of time, to intellectual and abstract terms. Speaking
broadly, things in which were manifest size and qualities, as strength,
independence, governing or controlling power, usually attaching to the
male, were classed as masculine; whilst those in which the gentler and
more subordinate features were apparent were classed as feminine. Of
course marked exceptions to this will at once occur to us, as, _e.g._, in
certain savage and civilised languages, where the sun is feminine and the
moon is masculine, but in the main the division holds good. The big is
male and the small is female. The Dyaks of Borneo call a heavy downpour of
rain a _he_ rain; and, if so strength-imparting a thing as bread is to be
classed as either masculine or feminine, we must agree with the negro who,
in answer to his master’s question, “Sambo, where’s the bread?” replied,
“De bread, massa? him lib in de pantry.” The mediæval Persians are said to
have distinguished between male and female even in such things as food and
cloth, air and water, and prescribed their proper use accordingly; while,
as Dr. Tylor, from whom the above is quoted, adds, “even we, with our
blunted mythologic sense, cannot give an individual name to a lifeless
object, such as a boat or a weapon, without in the very act imagining for
it something of a personal nature.”

But we must not stay longer in these attractive byways of philology,
however warranted the digression may be, and must return to the
many-titled sun.

Whilst in the more elaborate mythologies of classic peoples we find him
addressed in exalted terms which are still the metaphors of poetry, we are
nearer the rough material out of which all myth is shaped when among races
who speak of sun, moon, and stars as father, mother, and children, and who
mean exactly what they say. We may find similar relationships in the solar
and lunar deities of Egyptian and classic myth, but profound moral
elements have entered into these and dissolved the material. We are face
to face with the awful and abiding questions personified in Osiris and
Isis, in Œdipus and Jocaste, where for us the sunlight pales and the storm
clouds are dispersed before the dazzling mysteries of human life and
destiny.

No such matters confront us when in Indian myth we read that the moon is
the sun’s sister, an aged, pale-faced woman, who in kindness led to her
brother two of the tribe who had sprung through a chasm in the sky to the
pleasant moonlit land. Neither do they in Australian myth, which shows
that the dwellers on Olympus had no monopoly of conjugal faithlessness.
For in it Mityan, the moon, is a native cat, who fell in love with
somebody else’s wife, and has been driven to wander ever since. Among the
Bushmen, the moon has incurred the sun’s anger, and is hacked smaller and
smaller by him, till, begging for mercy, a respite is given. But as soon
as he grows larger the sun hacks him again. In Slavonic myth the sun
cleaves him through for loving the morning star. The Indians of the far
west say that, when the moon is full, evil spirits begin nibbling at it,
and eat a portion every night till it is all gone; then a great spirit
makes a new moon, and, weary with his toil, falls asleep, when the bad
spirits renew their attack. Another not uncommon group of myths is that
which speaks of sun and moon as borne across the heavens on the backs of
ancestors, as in Greek myth Atlas supports the world, or as in ceaseless
flight, dogged by some pursuer, moon-dog, or “sun-wolf,” as parhelion is
called in Swedish. The group of kindred myths to which eclipses gave rise,
when the cloud-dragon or serpent tries to swallow sun or moon, and for a
time succeeds, is too well known to need other than passing reference
here.

A widespread body of myth has its source in the patches on the moon’s
face. In the Samoan Islands these are said to be a woman, a child, and a
mallet. A woman was once hammering out paper-cloth, and seeing the moon
rise, looking like a great bread-fruit, she asked it to come down and let
her child eat a piece of it. But the moon was very angry at the idea of
being eaten, and gobbled up the woman, child, and mallet, and there they
are to this day. The Selish Indians of North-Western America say that the
little wolf was in love with the toad, and pursued her one moonlight
night, till, as a last chance, she made a desperate spring on to the face
of the moon, and there she is still. People in the East see the figure of
a hare in the patches, and both in Buddhist Jâtakas and Mongolian myth
that animal is carried by the moon. In Greenland myth the moon was in love
with his sister, and stole in the dark to caress her. She, wishing to find
out who her lover was, blackened her hands so that the marks might be left
on him, which accounts for the spots. The Khasias of the Himâlaya say that
the moon falls in love every month with his mother-in-law, who, like a
well-conducted matron, throws ashes in his face. Grimm quotes a mediæval
myth that the moon is Mary Magdalene, and the spots her tears of
repentance, whilst in Chaucer’s _Testament of Cressida_ the moon is Lady
Cynthia.--

  “On her brest a chorl paintid ful even,
     _Bering a bush of thornis on his bake_,
   Which for his _theft_ might clime no ner the heven.”

Comparing these with more familiar myths, we have our own man in the moon,
who is said to be the culprit found by Moses gathering sticks on the
Sabbath, although his place of banishment is a popular addition to the
Scripture narrative. According to the German legend he was a scoffer who
did the same heinous offence on a Sunday, and was given the alternative of
being scorched in the sun or frozen in the moon. The Frisians say that he
stole cabbages, the load of which he bears on his back. He does not appear
as a member of the criminal classes in China, his function being that of
celestial matchmaker, who ties together future couples with an invisible
silken cord which breaks not during life. In Icelandic myth the two
children familiar to us as Jack and Jill were kidnapped by the moon, and
there they stand to this day with bucket on pole across their shoulders,
falling away one after the other as the moon wanes,--a phase described in
the couplet:--

  “Jack fell down and broke his crown,
   And Jill came tumbling after.”

Mr. Baring Gould, whose essay on this subject in his _Curious Myths of the
Middle Ages_ gives a convenient summary of current legends, contends that
Jack and Jill are the Hjuki and Bil of the _Edda_, and signify the waxing
and waning of the moon, their bucket indicating the dependence of rainfall
on her phases--a superstition extant among us yet.

The group of customs observed amongst both barbaric and civilised peoples
at the changes of the moon, customs which are meaningless except as relics
of lunar worship, belong to the passage of mythology into religion, of
personifying into deifying.

(_b._) _The Stars._

In the great body of nature-myth the stars are prominent members. In their
multitude; their sublime repose in upper calms above the turmoil of the
elements; their varying brilliancy, “one star differing from another star
in glory”; their tremulous light; their scattered positions, which lend
themselves to every vagary of the constellation-maker; their slow
procession, varied only by sweeping comet and meteor, or falling showers
of shooting stars; they lead the imagination into gentler ways than do the
vaster bodies of the most ancient heavens. Nor, although we may compute
their number, weigh their volume, in a few instances reckon their
distance, and, capturing the light that has come beating through space for
unnumbered years, make it reveal the secret of their structure, is the
imagination less moved by the clear heavens at night, or the feeling of
awe and reverence blunted before that “mighty sum of things for ever
speaking.”

In barbaric myth the stars are spoken of as young suns, the children of
the sun and moon, but more often as men who have lived on the earth,
translated without seeing death. The single stars are individual chiefs or
heroes; the constellations are groups of men or animals. To the natives of
Australia the brilliant Jupiter is a chief among the others; and the stars
in Orion’s belt and scabbard are young men dancing a corroboree, the
Pleiades being girls playing to them. The Kasirs of Bengal say that the
stars are men who climbed to the top of a tree, and were left in the
branches by the trunk being cut away. To the Eskimos the stars in Orion
are seal-hunters who have missed their way home. And in German folk-lore
they are spoken of as the mowers, because, as Grimm says, “they stand in a
row like mowers in a meadow.” In North American myth two of the bright
stars are twins who have left a home where they were harshly treated, and
leapt into the sky, whither their parents followed them and ceaselessly
chase them. In Greek myth the faintest star of the seven Pleiades is
Merope, whose light was dimmed because she alone among her sisters married
a mortal. The New Zealanders say that those stars are seven chiefs who
fell in battle, and of whom only one eye of each is now visible. In Norse
myth Odin having slain a giant, plucks out his eyes and flings them up to
the sky, where they become two stars. In German star-lore the small star
just above the middle one in the shaft of Charles’s Wain, is a waggoner
who, having given our Saviour a lift, was offered the kingdom of heaven
for his reward, but who said he would sooner be driving from east to west
to all eternity, and whose desire was granted--a curious contrast to the
wandering Jew, cursed to move unresting over the earth until the day of
judgment, because he refused to let Jesus, weary with the weight of the
cross, rest for a moment on his doorstep. The Housatonic Indians say that
the stars in Charles’s Wain are men hunting a bear, and that the chase
lasts from spring to autumn, when the bear is wounded and its dripping
blood turns the leaves of the trees red. With this may be cited the myth
that the red clouds at morn and eve are the blood of the slain in battle.
In the Northern Lights the Greenlanders see the spirits of the departed
dancing, the brighter the flashes of the Aurora the greater the merriment,
whilst the Dacotas say of the meteors that they are spirits flying through
the air.

Of the Milky Way--so called because Hêrê, indignant at the bantling
Herakles being put to her breast, spilt her milk along the sky (the solar
mythologers say that the “red cow of evening passes during the night
across the sky scattering her milk”)--the Ottawas say that it was caused
by a turtle swimming along the bottom of the sky and stirring up the mud.
According to the Patagonians it is the track along which the departed
tribesmen hunt ostriches, the clouds being their feathers; in African myth
it is some wood-ashes long ago thrown up into the sky by a girl, that her
people might be able to see their way home at night; in Eastern myth it
is chaff dropped by a thief in his hurried flight.

The idea of a land beyond the sky--be it the happy hunting-ground of the
Indian, or the Paradise of Islam, or the new Jerusalem of the
Apocalypse--would not fail to arise, and in both the Milky Way and the
Rainbow barbaric fancy sees the ladders and bridges whereby the departed
pass from earth to heaven. So we find in the lower and higher culture
alike the beautiful conceptions of the _chemin des ames_, the Red man’s
road of the dead to their home in the sun; the ancient Roman path of, or
to, the gods; the road of the birds, in both Lithuanian and Finnish myth,
because the winged spirits flit thither to the free and happy land. In
prosaic contrast to all this, it is curious to find among ourselves the
Milky Way described as Watling Street! That famous road, which ran from
Richborough through Canterbury and London to Chester, now gives its name
to a narrow bustling street of Manchester warehousemen in the City. But
who the Wætlingas were--whether giants, gods, or men--and why their name
was transferred from Britain to the sky, we do not know,[7] although the
fact is plainly enough set down in old writers, foremost among whom is
Chaucer. In his _House of Fame_[8] he says:--

  “Lo, there, quod he, cast up thine eye,
   se yondir, to, the galaxie,
   the whiche men clepe the Milky Way,
   for it is white, and some parfay
   ycallin it han Watlingestrete.”

To the savage the rainbow is a living monster, a serpent seeking whom it
may devour, coming to earth to slake its unquenchable thirst, and preying
on the unwary. But in more poetic myth, its mighty many-coloured arch
touching, as it seems to do, the earth itself, is a road to glory. In the
_Edda_ it is the three-coloured bridge Bifröst, “the quivering track” over
which the gods walk, and of which the red is fire, so that the
Frost-giants may not cross it. In Persian myth it is Chinvad, the “bridge
of the gatherer,” flung across the gloomy depths between this world and
the home of the blessed; in Islam it is El-Sirat, the bridge thin as a
hair and sharp as a scimitar, stretching from this world to the next;
among the Greeks it was Iris, the messenger from Zeus to men, charged with
tidings of war and tempest; to the Finns it was the bow of Tiernes, the
god of thunder; whilst to the Jew it was the messenger of grace from the
Eternal, who did set “his bow in the clouds” as the promise that never
again should the world be destroyed by flood. Such belief in the heavens
as the field of activities profoundly affecting the fortunes of mankind,
and in the stars as influencing their destinies, has been persistent in
the human mind. The delusions of the astrologer are embalmed in language,
as when, forgetful of a belief shared not only by sober theologians, but
by Tycho Brahe and Kepler, we speak of “disaster,” and of our friends as
“jovial,” “saturnine,” or “mercurial.” But the illusions of the savage or
semi-civilised abide as an animating part of many a faith, undisturbed by
a science which has swept the skies and found no angels there, and whose
keen analysis separates for ever the ancient belief in a connection
between the planets and man’s fate. For convenience’ sake, we retain on
our celestial maps and globes the men and monsters pictured by barbaric
fancy in the star-positions and clusters, noting these as interesting
examples of survival. Yet we are the willing dupes of illusions nebulous
as these, and, charm he never so wisely, the Time-spirit fails to
disenchant us.

(_c._) _The Earth and Sky._

If the sun and moon are the parents of the stars, the heavens and the
earth are the parents of all living things. Of this widely-found myth, one
of the most striking specimens occurs among the Maoris. From Rangi, the
heaven, and Papa, the earth, sprang all living things; but earth and sky
clave together, and darkness rested on them and their children, who
debated whether they should rend them asunder or slay them. Then
Tane-mahuta, father of forests, reasoned that it was better to rend them,
so that the heaven might become a stranger, and the earth remain as their
nursing-mother. One after another they strove to do this, but in vain,
until Tane-mahuta, with giant strength and strain, pressed down the earth
and thrust upward the heaven. But one of his brothers, father of wind and
storm, who had not agreed to this parting of his parents, followed Rangi
into the sky, and thence sent forth his progeny, “the mighty winds, the
fierce squalls, the clouds dense and dark, wildly drifting, wildly
hunting,” himself rushing on his foe, snapping the huge trees that barred
his path, and strewing their trunks and branches on the ground, while the
sea was lashed into high-crested waves, and all the creatures therein
affrighted. The fish darted hither and thither, but the reptiles fled into
the forests, causing quarrel between Tangaroa, the ocean-god, and
Tane-mahuta for giving them shelter. So the brothers fought, the ocean-god
wrecking the canoes and sweeping houses and trees beneath the waters, and
had not Papa hidden the gods of the tilled food and the wild within her
bosom, they would have perished. Wars of revenge followed quickly one upon
the other; the storm-god’s anger was not soon appeased; so that the
devastation of the earth was well-nigh complete. But, at last, light arose
and quiet ensued, and the dry land appeared. Rangi and Papa, parted for
ever, quarrelled no more, but helped the one the other, and “man stood
erect and unbroken on his mother Earth.”

The myth of Cronus will at once occur to the reader. Heaven (Uranus) and
Earth (Gaea) were husband and wife, and their many children all hated
their father for concealing them between the hollows of their mother’s
breasts, so that they were shut out from light. Gaea sided with them and
provided Cronus, the youngest, with an iron sickle wherewith he unmanned
Uranus and separated him from Gaea. Cronus married his sister Rhea, and,
at the advice of his parents, swallowed his children one by one as they
were born, lest they grew up and usurped his place among the Immortals.
But when Zeus was born, and Cronus asked for the child, Rhea deceived him
by giving him a stone wrapped in swaddling bands. When Zeus grew up he
gave his father an emetic, whereupon the children were all disgorged, and
with them the stone, which became a sacred object at Delphi. There is no
such being as Cronus in Sanskrit, but what may be called the Vedic variant
of the myth is that in which Dyaus (Heaven) and Prithivî (Earth), were
once joined and subsequently separated.

In China we find a legend of “a person called Puangku, who is said to have
separated the heaven and the earth, they formerly being pressed down close
together,” and, as one might expect, such a transparent nature-myth of the
rending asunder of the world and sky is widespread.

The solar mythologists were perplexed at its presence among the refined
and cultured Greeks. “How can we imagine that a few generations before the
time of Solon the highest notions of the Godhead among the Greeks were
adequately expressed by the story of Uranus maimed by Cronus, of Cronus
eating his own children, swallowing a stone, and vomiting out alive his
own progeny. Among the lowest tribes of Africa and America we hardly find
anything more hideous and revolting.” So the moral character of the Greeks
and the exclusive comparative method of Professor Max Müller and his
adherents were vindicated by the discovery that as Cronus means time, the
apparently repulsive myth simply means that time swallows up the days
which spring from it; “and,” remarks Sir G. W. Cox in his _Manual of
Mythology_, “the old phrase meant simply this and nothing more, although
before the people came to Greece they had forgotten its meaning.”[9]
Cronus is a more than usually troublesome _crux_ to the etymologists.

Here, as elsewhere, “the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life;” and
we may turn to the fundamental idea resident in the myth. The savage, in
the presence of recurring light and darkness, of the clouds lifting and
dispersing before the sunrise, has his legend of a time when this was not
so, but when heaven and earth were closed-in one upon the other till some
hero thrust them apart. And, to his rude intelligence, the conception of
night as a devouring monster, might easily “start the notion of other
swallowing and disgorging beings.” In brief, to quote Mr. Andrew Lang,
“just as the New Zealander had conceived of heaven and earth as at one
time united, to the prejudice of their children, so the ancestors of the
Greeks had believed in an ancient union of heaven and earth. Both by
Greeks and Maoris, heaven and earth were thought of as living persons,
with human parts and passions. Their union was prejudicial to their
children, and so the children violently separated their parents.”[10]

The beliefs of the ancient Finns, as described in the _Kalevala_, in the
world as a divided egg, of which the white is the ocean, the yolk the sun,
the arched shell the sky, and the darker portions the clouds; and of the
Polynesians that the universe is the hollow of a vast cocoa-nut shell, at
the tapering bottom of which is the root of all things, are to us so
grotesque that it is not easy to regard them as explanations seriously
invented by the human mind. Yet these, together with the notions of the
two halves of the shell of Brahma’s egg, and of the two calabashes which
form the heaven and the earth in African myth, find their correspondences
in the widespread conception of the over-arching firmament as a hard and
solid thing,[11] with holes (or windows[12]) to let the rain through, with
gates through which angels descend,[13] or through which prophets peer
into celestial mysteries;[14] a firmament outside which other people live,
as instanced by the Polynesian term for strangers, “papalangi,” or
“heaven-bursters.” In Esthonian myth Ilmarine hammers steel into a vault
which he strained like a tent over the earth, nailing thereon the silver
stars and moon, and suspending the sun from the roof of the tent with
machinery to lift it up and let it down. The like achievement is recorded
of Ilmarinen in the _Kalevala_, the cosmogony of which corresponds to that
of the Esthonian _Kalevipöeg_.

These are the less refined forms of myths which have held their ground
from pre-scientific times till now, and the rude analogies of which are
justified by the appearances of things as presented by the senses. Man’s
intellectual history is the history of his escape from the illusions of
the senses, it is the slow and often tardily accepted discovery that
nature is quite other than that which it seems to be. And this variance
between appearances and realities remained hidden until the intellect
challenged the report about phenomena which the sense-perceptions brought.
For in the ages when feeling was dominant, and the judgment scarce
awakened, the simple explanations in venerable legends sung by bard or
told by aged crone--legends to which age had given sanctity which finally
placed them among the world’s sacred literatures--were received without
doubt or question. But, as belief in causality spread, men were not
content to rest in the naïve explanations of an uncritical age. What man
had guessed about nature gave place to what nature had to say about
herself, and with the classifying of experience science had its birth.

Meanwhile, until this quite recent stage in man’s progress was reached,
the senses told their blundering tale of an earth flat and fixed, with
sun, moon, and stars as its ministering servants, while gods or beasts
upbore it, and mighty pillars supported the massive firmament In Hindu
myth the tortoise which upholds the earth rests upon an elephant, whose
legs _reach all the way down_! In Bogotà the culture-god Bochica punishes
a lesser and offending deity by compelling him to sustain the part of
Atlas, and it is in shifting his burden from shoulder to shoulder that
earthquakes are caused. The natives of Celebes say that these are due to
the world-supporting Hog as he rubs himself against a tree; the
Thascaltecs that they occur when the deities who hold up the world relieve
one another; the Japanese think that they are caused by huge dragons
wriggling underground, an idea probably confirmed by the discovery of
monster fossil bones. In Algonquin myth the mighty man Earthquake “can
pass along under the ground, and make all things shake and tremble by his
power.”

As the myths about earth-bearers prevail in the regions of earthquakes, so
do those about subterranean beings in the neighbourhood of volcanoes. The
superstitions which mountainous countries especially foster are
intensified when the mountains themselves cast forth their awful and
devastating progeny, “red ruin” and the other children born of them. Man
in his dread, “caring in no wise for the external world, except as it
influenced his own destiny; honouring the lightning because it could
strike him, the sea because it could drown him,”[15] could do naught else
than people them with maleficent beings, and conceive of their
sulphur-exhaling mouths as the jaws of a bottomless pit.

(_d._) _Storm and Lightning, etc._

If in freeing ourselves from the tyranny of the “solar” theory we shackled
ourselves with some other, we should certainly prefer that which is known
as the “meteorological,” and which, in the person of Kuhn and other
supporters, finds a more rational and persistent source of myth in
phenomena which are fitful and startling, such as hurricane and tempest,
earthquake and volcanic outburst. Sunrises and sunsets happen with a
regularity which failed to excite any strong emotion or stimulate
curiosity, and the remotest ancestor of the primitive Aryan soon shook off
the habit--if, indeed, he ever acquired it--of going to bed in fear and
trembling lest the sun should not come back again. Nature, in her softer
aspects and her gracious bounties, in the spring-time with its promise,
the summer with its glory, the autumn with its gifts, has moved the heart
of man to song and festival and procession; as, by contrast, the frosts
that nipped the early buds and the fierce heat that withered the
approaching harvest gave occasion for plaintive ditty and sombre ceremony.
It is in the fierce play and passionate outbursts of the elements, in the
storm, the lightning, and the thunder, that the feelings are aroused and
that the terror-stricken fancy sees the strife of wrathful deities, or
depicts their dire work amongst men. Hence, all the world over, the
storm-god and the wind-god have played a mighty part.

To the savage, the wind, blowing as it listeth, its whence and whither
unknown, itself invisible, yet the sweep and force of its power manifest
and felt, must have ranked amongst the most striking phenomena. And, as
will be seen hereafter, the correspondences between wind and breath, and
the connection between breath and life, added their quota of mystery in
man’s effort to account for the impalpable element. Of this
personification of the elements the following Ojibway folk-tale, cited by
Dorman, gives poetic illustration:--“There were spirits from all parts of
the country. Some came with crashing steps and roaring voice, who directed
the whirlwinds which were in the habit of raging about the neighbouring
country. Then glided in gently a sweet little spirit, which blew the
summer gale. Then came in the old sand-spirit, who blew the sand-squalls
in the sand-buttes toward the west. He was a great speech-maker, and shook
the lodge with his deep-throated voice, as he addressed the spirits of the
cataracts and waterfalls, and those of the islands who wore beautiful
green blankets.”

In the legends of the Quiches, the mysterious creative power is Hurakan
(whence _hurricane_), among the Choctaws the original word for Deity is
Hushtoli, the storm-wind, and in Peru to kiss the air was the commonest
and simplest sign of adoration of the collective divinities. The
Guayacuans of South America, when a storm arose and there was much thunder
or wind, all went out in troops, as it were to battle, shaking their clubs
in the air, shooting flights of arrows in that direction whence the storm
came.[16]

The Araucanians thought that gales and thunderstorms were the battles
fought between the spirits of the dead and their foes.

Turning to the literatures of higher races, we find in the prose _Edda_,
when Gangler asks whence comes the wind, that Ha answers him: “Thou must
know that at the northernmost point in the heavens sits a giant,

  “In the guise of an eagle;
     And the winds, it is said,
   Rush down on the earth
     From his outspreading pinions.”

In Finnish myth the north wind Pulmri, father of the frost, is sometimes
imaged as an eagle.

“The Indians believe in a great bird called by them _Wochowsen_ or
_Wuchowsen_, meaning Wind-Blow or the Wind-Blower, who lives far to the
north, and sits upon a great rock at the end of the sky. And it is because
whenever he moves his wings the wind blows they of old times called him
that.” And in another Algonquin myth: “Ga-oh is the Spirit of the Winds.
He moves the winds, but he is chained to a rock. The winds trouble him,
and he tries very hard to get free. When he struggles the winds are
forced away from him, and they blow upon the earth. Sometimes he suffers
terrible pain, and then his struggles are violent. This makes the winds
wild, and they do damage on the earth. Then he feels better and goes to
sleep, and the winds become quiet also.”[17]

In the _Veda_ the Maruts or Storm-gods, to whom many of the hymns are
addressed, “make the rocks to tremble and tear asunder the kings of the
forest,” like Hermes in his violence and like Boreas in his rage. Whether
or no they become in Scandinavian legend the grim and fearful Ogres
swiftly sailing in their cloud-ships, we may see in them the “crushers”
and “grinders,”[18] as their name imports, the types of northern deities
like Odin, long degraded into the Wild Huntsman and his phantom crew,
whose uncouth yells the peasant hears in the midnight air.[19] Among the
Aztecs Cuculkan, the bird-serpent, was a personification of the wind,
especially of the east wind, as bringer of the rain. It was at one of his
shrines, to which pilgrimages were made from great distances, that the
Spaniards first saw to their surprise a cross surmounting the temple of
this god of the wind, whence arose a legend that the Apostle Thomas had
evangelised America. But, in fact, the pagan cross of Central America and
Mexico was the symbol of the four cardinal points.

In his valuable book on the _Myths of the Red Race_ Dr. Brinton has
brought together a mass of evidence in support of a theory that the
sanctity in which the number four is held by the American races is due to
the adoration of the cardinal points, which are identified with the four
winds, who in hero-myths are the four ancestors of the human race. The
illustrations with which the argument is supported are numerous and
valuable, but the argument itself is made to rest too strongly on an
assumed primitive symbolism, whereas it suffices to show how the early
notion of the flat world, as also square, would lead to the myth of the
four winds blowing from the four corners, a myth often illustrated in
ancient maps with an angel at each corner from whose mouth the wind
issues. The official title of the Incas was “Lord of the four quarters of
the earth,” and the number appears in all sorts of combinations, but the
theory may be pushed to extremes in compelling every fact to square with
it.[20] As the illustrations given above show, we are some steps nearer to
the primitive myth when we find the wind conceived of as a mighty bird,
which indeed is in both old and new world mythology a common symbol of
thunder and lightning also. On this matter Dr. Brinton’s remarks bear
quoting.

    Like the wind the bird sweeps through the aërial spaces, sings in the
    forests, and rustles on its course; like the cloud it floats in
    mid-air, and casts its shadow on the earth; like the lightning it
    darts from heaven to earth to strike its unsuspecting prey. These
    tropes were truths to savage nations, and led on by that law of
    language which forced them to conceive everything as animate or
    inanimate, itself the product of a deeper law of thought which urges
    us to ascribe life to whatever has motion, they found no animal so
    appropriate for their purpose here as the bird. Therefore the
    Algonquins say that birds always make the winds, that they create the
    waterspouts, and that the clouds are the spreading and agitation of
    their wings; the Navajos that at each cardinal point stands a white
    swan, who is the spirit of the blasts; so also the Dakotas frequently
    explain the thunder as the sound of the cloud-bird flapping his wings;
    the lightning as the fire that flashes from his tracks, like the
    sparks which the buffalo scatters when he scours over a stony plain.

Estimates differ much as to the size of the Thunder-Bird. In one tradition
an Indian found its nest, and secured a feather which was above two
hundred feet long, while in another tradition the bird is said to be no
bigger than one’s little finger. But among the Western Indians he is an
immense eagle. “When this aërial monster flaps his wings loud peals of
thunder roll over the prairie; when he winks his eye it lightens; when he
wags his tail the waters of the lake which he carries on his back overflow
and produce rain.” Mixcoatl, the Mexican Cloud-Serpent, as well as Jove,
carries his bundle of arrows or thunderbolts, which in the hand of Thor
are represented by his mighty club or hammer. The old and universal belief
that stones were hurled by the Thunder-God is not so far-fetched as we, in
our pride of science, might think, for the flints which are mistaken for
thunderbolts, and which become objects of adoration as well as charms,
produce a flash when struck by the lightning. In the lightning flash man
would see the descent of fire from heaven for his needs. That he should
regard it, like water, as a living creature, with power to hurt or help
him, is in keeping with attribution of life to all that moved. Its
apparent connection with the great source of heat would foster the feeling
which expressed itself in fire-worship, with its curious survivals to
modern times. No element was more calculated to excite awe in its seeming
unrelation to the objects which produced it. Once secured, to guard it
from extinction or theft was a serious duty, and everything from which it
issued, trees as its hiding-place, since it came from the wood when
rubbed, stones also, since sparks shot from them when struck, were held
sacred. In the manifold myths about its origin one feature is common, that
its seed was stolen, the chief agents (probably as the messengers between
earth and sky) being birds, or men assuming the form of birds. The Sioux
Indians say that their first ancestor procured his fire from the sparks
which a panther struck from the rocks as he bounded up a hill. But of
examples from the lower culture, forerunners of the Zeus-defying
Prometheus, Mr. Gill’s _Myths of the South Pacific_ supplies one which may
be taken as a sample of the rest. Maui, a famous South Sea hero, finding
some cooked food in a basket brought by Buataranga from the nether world,
and relishing it more than raw food, determines to steal the fire, and
flying to the Buataranga’s realm frightens the fire-god by threats and
blows into revealing the secret. Then wresting the fire-sticks from him he
sets the under-world in flames, and returns with his prize to the
upper-world; thenceforth “all the dwellers there used fire-sticks, and
enjoyed the luxuries of light and of cooked food.”

(_e._) _Light and Darkness._

As in the conflict raging in the sky during gale or tempest, when the
light and the darkness alternately prevail, the barbaric mind sees war
waged between the heroes of the spirit-land who have carried their
unsettled blood feuds thither, so in many myths the lightning is no
comrade of the thunder, but its foe, the battle of bird with serpent. The
resemblance of the lightning flash to the sharp, sudden, zigzag movements
of the serpent, a creature so mysterious to barbaric man in its unlikeness
to the beasts of the field, accounts for a myth the influence of which as
a terrorising agent on human conduct is in course of rapid decay. Its
importance in the history of belief in the supernatural is too
far-reaching to be passed over, and in tracing its course it is necessary
to show its connection with the group of storm-myths and sun-myths of the
Aryan race in the battles between Indra and Vritra, Ormuzd and Ahriman,
Thor and Midgard, Hercules and Cacus, Apollo and Pythôn, and St. George
and the Dragon.

All the Aryan nations have among their legends, often exalted into epic
themes, the story of a battle between a hero and a monster. In each case
the hero conquers, and releases treasures, or in some way renders succour
to man, through his victory. In Hindu myth this battle is fought between
Indra and Vritra.

Indra, one of the Vedic gods, comes, according to Professor Max Müller,
from the same root as the Sanskrit _indu_, drop, sap, but the etymology is
doubtful. What is not doubtful is that he is the god of the bright sky,
and although, like the other gods invoked in the hymns of the _Rig-Veda_,
a departmental or tribal deity, he is a sort of _primus inter pares_, of
whose many titles, Vritrahan or “Vritra-slayer” is the pre-eminent one.
The benefits showered by him upon mortals caused the attribution of moral
qualities to him, and he was adored as “lord of the virtues,” while the
juice of the sacred soma plant was offered in his honour, for which reason
he is also called Somapâ or “soma-drinker.” It is his struggle with Vritra
which is a constant theme of the Vedic hymns, the burden of which remind
us of the praises offered in the Psalms to Yahweh as a man of war, as
mighty in battle. “The gods do not reach thee, nor men, thou overcomest
all creatures in strength.... Thou thunderer, hast shattered with thy bolt
the broad and massive cloud into fragments, and has sent down the waters
that were confined in it to flow at will; verily thou alone possessest all
power.” The primitive physical meaning of the myth is clear. Indra is the
sun-god, armed with spears and arrows, for such did the solar rays
sometimes appear to barbaric fancy. The rain-clouds are imprisoned in
dungeons or caverns by Vritra, the “enveloper,” the thief, serpent, wolf,
wild boar, as he is severally styled in the _Rig-Veda_. Indra attacks him,
hurls his darts at him, they pierce the cloud-caverns, the waters are
released, and drop upon the earth as rain.

This explanation, which has many parallels in savage myth, is
self-consistent as fitting into crude philosophy of personal life and
volition in sun and cloud, and is fraught with deep truth of meaning in
regions like the Punjaub, where drought brought famine in its train.

The Aryans were a pastoral people, their wealth being in flocks and
herds.[21] The cow yielded milk for the household; her dung fertilised the
soil; her young multiplied the wealth of the family at an ever-increasing
rate, and she naturally became the symbol of fruitfulness and prosperity,
ultimately an object of veneration; while, for the functions which the
bull performed, he was the type of strength. The Aryan’s enemy was he who
stole or injured the cattle; the Aryan’s friend was he who saved them from
the robber’s clutch.

Intellectually, the Aryan tribes were, speaking broadly, in the mythopœic
stage, and the personification of phenomena was rife among them. Their
barbaric fancy, as kindred myths all the world over testify, would find
ample play in the fleeting and varied scenery of the cloud-flecked
heavens, suggestive, as this would be, of bodies celestial and bodies
terrestrial. To these children of the plain the heavens were a vast, wide
expanse, over which roamed supra-mundane beasts, the two most prominent
figures in their mythical zoology being the cow and the bull. The sun,
giver of blessed light, was the bull of majesty and strength; the white
clouds were cows, from whose swelling udders dropped the milk of
heaven--the blessed rain. But there were dark clouds also, clouds of night
and clouds of storm, and within these lurked the monster-robber; into them
he lured the herds, and withheld both light and rain from the children of
men. To the sun-god, therefore, who smote the thief-dragon, Vritra, with
his shaft, and set free the imprisoned cows, went up the shout of praise,
the song of gratitude. This myth survives in many legends of the Aryan
race, and their family likeness is unmistakable. In its Latin guise it
appears as Hercules[22] and Cacus, although the preciseness of detail
narrated by Virgil, Livy, and other writers, has given it quasi-historical
rank. Hercules, after his victory over Geryon, stops to rest by the Tiber,
and while he is sleeping the three-headed monster, Cacus, steals some of
his cattle, dragging them by their tails into his cavern in Mons
Avertinus. Their bellowing awakens Hercules, who attacks the cavern, from
the mouth of which Cacus vomits flames, and roars as in thunder. But the
hero slays him and frees the cattle, a victory which the earlier Romans
celebrated with solemn rites at the Ara Maxima. In Greek myth the most
familiar examples are the struggles between the sun-god, Apollo, and the
storm-dragon, Pythôn, and the deliverance of the Princess Andromeda by
Perseus from the sea-monster sent by Poseidôn to ravage the land. In the
northern group we have the battle of Siegfried with the Niflungs, or
Niblungs, and of Sigurd with the dragon Fafnir, who guards golden
treasures; while, in the _Edda_, Thor goes fishing with the giant Hymir,
and catches the demon Loki, whose foul brood are Hell, the wolf Fenri, and
the Earth-girdling Serpent. Amongst ourselves, Beowulf, hero of the poem
of that name, attacks the dragon or fire-drake Grendel, who, with his
troll-mother, haunts a gloomy marsh-land. Thence he stole forth at night
to seize sleeping champions, taking them to his dwelling-place to devour
them, and this in such numbers that scarce a man was left. One pale night,
Beowulf awaited the coming of the monster, and, gripping him tightly,
snapped his limbs asunder, so that he died.

These brief illustrations would hardly be complete without some reference
to our national saint. Opinions differ as to his merits, Gibbon
stigmatising him as a fraudulent army contractor,[23] while the researches
of M. Ganneau seek to establish his relation to the Egyptian Horus and
Typhon. Be this as it may, the stirring old legend tells how George of
Cappadocia delivered the city of Silene from a dragon dwelling in a lake
hard by. Nothing that the people could give him satisfied his insatiate
maw, and in their despair they cast lots who among their dearest ones
should be flung to the dread beast. The lot fell to the king’s daughter,
and she went unflinchingly, like Jephthah’s daughter, to her fate. But on
the road the hero learns her sad errand, and bidding her fear not, he,
making sign of the cross, brandishes his lance, attacks and transfixes the
dragon, and leading him into Silene, beheads him in sight of all the
people, who, with their king, are baptized to the glory of Him who made
St. George the victor.[24]

(_f._) _The Devil._

While, however, the myth of Indra and Vritra has in its western variants
remained for the most part a battle between heroes and dragons, the moral
element rarely obscuring the physical features, it gave rise among the
Iranians or ancient Persians to a definite theology, the strange fortunes
of which have, as remarked above, profoundly affected Christendom.

Although in the Vedic hymns the features of the primitive nature-myth
reappear again and again, Indra himself boasting, “I slew Vritra, O
Maruts, with might, having grown strong with my own vigour; I who hold the
thunderbolt in my arms, I have made these all-brilliant waters to flow
freely for man,” we find an approach in them to some conception of that
spiritual conflict of which the physical conflict was so complete a
symbol. Indra as victor, is an object of adoration and invested with
purity and goodness; Vritra, as the enemy of men, is an object of dread,
and invested with malice and evil.

But while in the Zend-Avesta, the Scriptures of the old Iranian religion,
the struggle between Thraetaôna and the three-headed serpent Azhi-Dahâka
(in which names are recognisable the Traitana and Ahi of the _Veda_ and
the Feridun and Zohak of Persian epic) is narrated, the moral idea is
dominant throughout. The theme is not the attack of the sun-god to recover
stolen milch cows from the dragon’s cave, but the battle between Ormuzd,
the Spirit of Light, and Ahriman, the Spirit of Darkness. The one seeks to
mar the earth which the other has made. Into the fair paradise,
Airayana-Vaêjô, “a delightful spot,” as the Avesta calls it, “with good
waters and trees,” and into other smiling lands which Ormuzd has blessed,
Ahriman sends “a mighty serpent ... strong, deadly frost ... buzzing
insects, and poisonous plants ... toil and poverty,” and, worse than all,
“the curse of unbelief.”[25] Between these two spiritual powers and their
armies of good and bad angels the battle rages for supremacy in the
universe, for possession of the citadel of Mansoul.

Early in the history of the Asiatic Aryan tribes there had arisen a
quarrel between the Brahmanic and Iranian divisions. The latter had
become a quiet-loving, agricultural people, while the former remained
marauding nomads, attacking and harassing their neighbours. In their
plundering inroads they invoked the aid of spells and sacrifices, offering
the sacred soma-juice to their gods, and nerving themselves for the fray
by deep draughts of the intoxicating stuff. Not only they, but their gods
as well, thereby became objects of hatred to the peaceful Iranians, who
foreswore all worship of freebooter’s deities, and transformed these
_devas_ of the old religion into demons. That religion, as common to the
Indo-European race, was polytheistic, a worship of deities each ruling
over some department of nature, but a worship exalting now one, now
another god, be it Indra, or Varuna, or Agni, according to the indications
of the deity’s supremacy, or according to the mood of the worshipper. As
remarked by Jacob Grimm, “the idea of the devil is foreign to all
primitive religions,” obviously because in all primitive thought evil and
good are alike regarded as the work of deities. In the Old Testament,
Yahweh is spoken of as the author of both;[26] the angels, whether charged
with weal or woe, are his messengers. In the _Iliad_ Zeus dispenses
both:--

  “Two urns by Jove’s high throne have ever stood,
   The source of evil one, the other good;
   From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
   Blessings to these, to those distribute ills,
   To most, he mingles both,”[27]

and ’tis a far cry from this to the loftier conception of Euripides: “If
the gods do evil, then are they no gods.” So there was a monotheistic--or,
as Professor Max Müller terms it, a henotheistic--element in the Vedic
religion which in the Iranian religion, and this mainly through the
teaching of the great thinker and reformer Zarathushtra (Zoroaster), was
largely diffused. In his endeavour to solve the old problem of reconciling
sin and misery with omnipotent goodness, he supposes “two primeval
causes,” one of which produced the “reality,” or good mind; the other the
“non-reality,” or evil mind. Behind these was developed belief in a
philosophical abstraction, “uncreate time,” of which each was the product;
but such doctrines were too subtle for the popular grasp, and, wrapped in
the old mythological garb, they appeared in concrete form as dualism.
Vritra survived in Ahriman, who, like him, is represented as a serpent;
and in Ormuzd we have the phonetic descendant of Ahura-mazda.

Now, it was with this dualism, this transformed survival of the sun and
cloud myth, that the Jews came into association during their memorable
exile in Babylon. Prior to that time their theology, as hinted above, had
no devil in it. But in that belief in spirits which they held in common
with all semi-civilised races, as a heritage from barbarous ancestors,
there were the elements out of which such a personality might be readily
evolved. Their _satan_, or “accuser,” as that word means, is no prince of
the demons, like the Beelzebul of later times; no dragon or old serpent,
as of the Apocalypse, defying Omnipotence and deceiving the whole world;
but a kind of detective who, by direction of Yahweh, has his eye on
suspects, and who is sent to test their fidelity. In all his missions he
acts as the intelligent and loyal servant of Yahweh. But although
therefore not regarded as bad himself, the character and functions with
which he was credited made easy the transition from such theories about
him to theories of him as inherently evil, as the enemy of goodness, and,
therefore, of God. He who, like Vritra, was an object of dread, came to be
regarded as the incarnation of evil, the author and abettor of things
harmful to man. Persian dualism gave concrete form to this conception, and
from the time of the Exile we find Satan as the Jewish Ahriman, the
antagonist of God. Not he alone, for “the angels that kept not their first
estate” were the ministers of his evil designs, creatures so numerous that
every one has 10,000 at his right hand and 1000 at his left hand, and
because they rule chiefly at night no man should greet another lest he
salute a demon. They haunt lonely spots, often assume the shape of beasts,
and it is their presence in the bodies of men and women which is the cause
of madness and other diseases.[28]

From the period when the Apocryphal books, especially those having traces
of Persian influence, were written,[29] this doctrine of an arch-fiend
with his army of demons received increasing impetus. It passed on without
check into the Christian religion, and wherever this spread the heathen
gods, like the _devas_ of Brahmanism among the Iranians, were degraded
into demons, and swelled the vast crowd of evil spirits let loose to
torment and ruin mankind.

This doctrine of demonology, it should be remembered, was but the
elaborated form of ancestral belief in spirits referred to above. In the
Christian system it was associated with that belief in magic which has its
roots in fetishism, and from the two arose belief in witchcraft. The
universal belief in demons in early and mediæval times supplied an easy
explanation of disasters and diseases; the sorcerers and charm-workers,
the wizards and enchanters, had passed into the service of the devil. For
power to work their spite and malevolence they had bartered their souls to
him, and sealed the bargain with their blood. It was enough for the
ignorant and frightened sufferers to accuse some poor, misshapen,
squinting old woman of casting on them the evil eye, or of appearing in
the form of a cat, to secure her trial by torture and her condemnation to
an unpitied death. The spread of popular terror led to the issue of Papal
bulls and to the passing of statutes in England and in other countries
against witchcraft, and it was not until late in the eighteenth century
that the laws against that imaginary crime were repealed.

There is no sadder chapter in the annals of this tearful world than this
ghastly story of witch-finding and witch-burning. Sprenger computes that
during the Christian epoch no less than _nine millions_ of persons, mostly
women of the poorer classes, were burned; victims of the survival into
relatively civilised times of an illusion which had its source in
primitive thought. It was an illusion which had the authority of Scripture
on its side;[30] the Church had no hesitation concerning it; such men as
Luther, Sir Thomas Browne, and Wesley never doubted it; the evidence of
the bewitched was supported by honest witnesses; and judges disposed to
mercy and humanity had no qualms in passing the dread sentence of the law
on the condemned.[31]

And although it exists not to-day, save in by-places where gross darkness
lurks, it was not destroyed by argument, by disproof, by direct assault,
but only through the quiet growth and diffusion of the scientific spirit,
before which it has dispersed. It could not live in an atmosphere thus
purified, an atmosphere charged with belief in unchanging causation and in
a definite order unbroken by caprice or fitfulness, whether in the sweep
of a planet or the pulsations of a human heart.

Of course the antecedents of the arch-fiend himself could not fail to be
the subject of curious inquiry in the time when his existence was no
matter of doubt. The old theologians scraped together enough material
about him from the sacred books of the Jews and Christians to construct an
elaborate biography of him; but in this they would seem to have explained
too much in certain directions and not enough in others, thus provoking a
reaction which ultimately discredited their painful research. Their
genealogy of him was carried farther back than they intended or desired,
for the popular notions credited him with both a mother and grandmother.
Their theory of his fall from heaven gave rise to the droll conception of
his lameness and to the legends of which the “devil on two sticks” is a
type. Their infusion of foreign element into his nature aided his
pictorial presentment in motley form and garb, as seen in the old
miracle-plays. To Vedic descriptions of Vritra’s darkness may perchance be
traced his murkiness and blackness; to Greek satyr and German
forest-sprite his goat-like body, his horns, his cloven hoofs, his tail;
to Thor his red beard; to dwarfs and goblins his red cloak and nodding
plume; to theories of transformation of men and spirits into animals his
manifold metamorphoses, as black cat, wolf, hellhound, and the like.

But his description was his doom; it was by a natural sequence that the
legends of mediæval times present him, not, with the Scotch theologians,
as a scholar and a swindler, disguising himself as a parson, but as
gullible and stupid, as over-reaching himself and as befooled by mortals.
And, like the Trolls of Scandinavian folk-lore who burst at sunrise, it
needed only the full light thrown upon his origin and development by the
researches of comparative mythologists to dissipate this creation of man’s
fears and fancies into the vaporous atmosphere where he had his birth.


§ IV.

THE SOLAR THEORY OF MYTH.

The cogency of the evidence concerning the development of belief in Satan
out of light-and-darkness myths is generally admitted, but it is of a kind
that must not be pushed too far. For the phases of Nature are manifold;
manifold also is the life of man; and we must not lend a too willing ear
to theories which refer the crude explanations of an unscientific age,
when the whole universe is Wonderland, to one source. _Cave hominem unius
libri_, says the adage, and we may apply it, not only to the man of one
book, but also to the man of one idea, in whom the sense of proportion is
lacking, and who sees only that for which he looks. Here such caution is
introduced as needful of exercise against the comparative mythologists
who, not content with showing--as abundant evidence warrants--that myth
has its germs in the investment of the powers of nature with personal life
and consciousness, contend that the great epics of our own and kindred
races are, from their broadest features to minutest detail, but
nature-myths obscured and transformed.

Certain scholars, notably Professor Max Müller, Sir G. W. Cox, and
Professor de Gubernatis, as interpreters of the myths of the Indo-European
peoples, and Dr. Goldziher, as an interpreter of Hebrew myth and cognate
forms, maintain that the names given in the mythopœic age to the sun, the
moon, and the changing scenery of the heaven as the fleeting forms and
myriad shades passed over its face, lost their original signification
wholly or partially, and came to be regarded as the names of veritable
deities and men, whose actions and adventures are the disguised
descriptions of the sweep of the thunder-charged clouds and of the victory
of the hero-god over their light-engulfing forces. But it is better to
state the theory in the words of its exponents, and for that purpose a
couple of extracts from Sir George Cox’s _Mythology of the Aryan Nations_
will suffice.

    In the spontaneous utterances of thoughts awakened by outward
    phenomena, we have the source of myths which must be regarded as
    _primary_. But it is obvious that such myths would be produced only so
    long as the words employed were used in their original meaning. If
    once the meaning of the word were either in part or wholly forgotten,
    the creation of a new personality under this name would become
    inevitable, and the change would be rendered both more certain and
    more rapid by the very wealth of words which were lavished on the
    sights and objects which most impressed their imagination. A thousand
    phrases would be used to describe the action of a beneficent or
    consuming sun, of the gentle or awful night, of the playful or furious
    wind; and every word or phrase become the germ of a new story as soon
    as the mind lost its hold on the original force of the name. Thus, in
    the polyonymy (by which term Sir George Cox means the giving of
    several names to one object), which was the result of the earliest
    form of human thought, we have the germ of the great epics of later
    times, and of the countless legends which make up the rich stores of
    mythical tradition ... and the legends so framed constitute the class
    of _secondary_ myths (p. 42).

    Henceforth the words which had denoted the sun and moon would denote
    not merely living things but living persons.... Every word would
    become an attribute, and all ideas, once grouped round a single
    object, would branch off into distinct personifications. The sun had
    been the lord of light, the driver of the chariot of the day; he had
    toiled and laboured for the sons of men, and sunk down to rest, after
    a hard battle, in the evening. But now the lord of light would be
    Phoibos Apollôn, while Helios would remain enthroned in his fiery
    chariot, and his toils and labours and death-struggles would be
    transferred to Heraklês. The violet clouds which greet his rising and
    his setting would now be represented by herds of cows which feed in
    earthly pastures. There would be other expressions which would still
    remain as floating phrases, not attached to any definite deities.
    These would gradually be converted into incidents in the life of
    heroes, and be woven at length into systematic variations. Finally,
    these gods and heroes, and the incidents of their mythical career,
    would receive each “a local habitation and a name.” These would remain
    as genuine history when the origin and meaning of the words had been
    either wholly or in part forgotten (p. 51).

Such is the “solar myth” theory. “We can hardly,” as Mr. Matthew Arnold
says, “now look up at the sun without having the sensations of a moth,”
and if occasion has not been given to the adversary to blaspheme, he has
been supplied with ample material for banter and ridicule. Some of the
happiest illustrations of this are made by Mr. Foster in his amusing and
really informing essay on “Nature Myths in Nursery Rhymes,” reprinted in
_Leisure Readings_,[32] an essay which it seems the immaculate critics
took _au sérieux_! With a little exercise of one’s invention, given also
ability to parody, it will be found that many noted events, as well as the
lives of the chief actors in them, yield results comforting to the solar
mythologists. Not only the _Volsungs_ and the _Iliad_, but the story of
the Crusades and of the conquest of Mexico; not only Arthur and Baldr, but
Cæsar and Bonaparte, may be readily resolved, as Professor Tyndall says we
all shall be, “like streaks of morning cloud, into the infinite azure of
the past.” Dupuis, in his researches into the connection between astronomy
and mythology, had suggested that Jesus was the sun, and the twelve
apostles the zodiacal signs; and Goldziher, analysing the records of a
remote period, maintains the same concerning Jacob and his twelve sons. M.
Senart has satisfied himself that Gotama, the Buddha, is a sun-myth.
Archbishop Whately, to confound the sceptics, ingeniously disproved the
existence of Bonaparte; and a French ecclesiastic has, by witty
etymological analogies, shown that Napoleon is cognate with Apollo, the
sun, and his mother Letitia identical with Leto, the mother of Apollo;
that his _personnel_ of twelve marshals were the signs of the zodiac; that
his retreat from Moscow was a fiery setting, and that his emergence from
Elba, to rule for twelve months, and then be banished to St. Helena, is
the sun rising out of the eastern waters to set in the western ocean after
twelve hours’ reign in the sky. But upon this solar theory let us cite
what Dr. Tylor, whose soberness of judgment renders him a valuable guide
along the zigzag path of human progress, says: “The close and deep
analogies between the life of nature and the life of man have been for
ages dwelt upon by poets and philosophers, who, in simile or in argument,
have told of light and darkness, of calm and tempest, of birth, growth,
change, decay, dissolution, renewal. But no one-sided interpretation can
be permitted to absorb into a single theory such endless many-sided
correspondences as these. Rash inferences which, on the strength of mere
resemblance, derive episodes of myth from episodes of nature, must be
regarded with utter mistrust, for the student who has no more stringent
criterion than this for his myths of sun and sky and dawn, will find them
wherever it pleases him to seek them.”

The investigations of comparative mythologists, more particularly in this
country and Germany, have thrown such valuable light on the history of
ideas, that it will be instructive to learn what excited the inquiry. The
researches of Niebuhr and his school into the credibility of early history
made manifest that the only authority on which the chroniclers relied was
tradition. To them--children of an uncritical age--that tradition was
venerable with the lapse of time, and binding as a revelation from the
gods. To us the charm and interest of it lie in detecting within it the
ancient deposit of a mythopœic period, and in deciphering from it what
manner of men they must have been among whom such explanation of the
beginnings had credence. And in such an inquiry nothing can be “common or
unclean,” nothing too trivial or puerile for analysis; for where the most
grotesque and impossible are found, there we are nearer to the conditions
of which we would know more.

The serious endeavour to get at the fact underlying the fabulous was
extended to the great body of mythology which had not been incorporated
into history, and the interpretations of which satisfied only those who
suggested them. As hinted already, the Greeks had sought out the meaning
of their myths, with here and there a glimpse of the truth gained; but
this was confined to the philosophers and poets. Euhêmeros degraded them
into dull chronicle, making Heraklês a thief who carried off a crop of
oranges; Jove a king crushing rebellion; Atlas an astronomer; Pythôn a
freebooter; Æolus a weather-wise seaman, and so on. Plutarch tried to
“restore” them, but only defaced them, and after centuries of neglect they
were discovered by Lord Bacon to be allegories with a moral. Then Banier
and Lemprière emptied out of them what little life Euhêmeros had left, and
the believers in Hebrew as the original speech of mankind saw in them the
fragments of a universal primitive revelation! Even Professor Max Müller
is so upset by the many loathsome and revolting stories in a mythology
current in the land of Lykurgos and Solon, such as the marriage of his
mother Jocasta by Œdipus, and the swallowing of his own children by
Cronus, that he inquires (as if he half believed it possible) whether
there was not “a period of temporary insanity through which the human mind
had to pass,” and a degradation from lovely metaphor to coarse fact which
only a “disease of language,” or the confusion arising from the forgotten
meanings of words, explains. There is no need, however, for assumptions of
this or of any other kind. This is best shown by a summary of facts which
led, more or less directly, to the formulation of the solar theory.

Some fifty years ago a good many idle speculations, products of a reverent
and uncurbed fancy concerning Hebrew as the primitive speech of mankind,
were laid to rest when the sober guess of Schlegel as to the connection of
the leading languages of Europe and those of India and Persia, was
converted into certainty by Bopp, Jacob Grimm, Schleicher, and later
scholars.

By the application of the comparative method to philology, _i.e._ the
interpretation of any set of facts by comparison with corresponding facts,
due allowance being made for differences which Grimm’s law (see _infra_)
explains, the relation of Greek, Latin, Slavonic, Teutonic, and Keltic to
one another and to Indian and Persian, and their consequent descent from a
common parent language, was proved. To this group the term Aryan (from a
Sanskrit word cognate with the root _ar_, our English word _ear_, to
plough), is given, a term which ancient records show was applied by the
Asiatic Aryans to themselves as the lords of the soil, the dominant race.
The names Indo-Germanic, and, more appropriately as roughly defining the
peoples included thereunder, Indo-European, have been suggested in its
stead, but Aryan, as the more convenient term, has come into general use.

The survival of grammatical forms common to the Aryan ancestors, and the
likeness between words necessary for daily use, evidenced to one parent
primitive speech, and, passing from words to the ideas and things which
they connoted, philologists were able to infer what manner of men these
Aryans were, and under what conditions they dwelt. In the enthusiasm
excited by so brilliant a discovery the soberest scholars were apt to
over-colour their accurately-outlined picture of old Aryan life; to read
modern meanings into the ancient words. But, making good allowance for
this, the sketch which was presented in Max Müller’s famous paper on
_Comparative Mythology_[33] remains a credit to scholarship in its vivid
generalisations from immaterial data.

Professor Max Müller, in agreement with Pictet and others, placed the
original settlement of the Aryans as probably in the region between the
Hindu Kush Mountains and the Caspian Sea. But the opinion of later
scholars of cooler judgment leans to Europe rather than to Asia as the
primitive home of the Aryan tribes. The scanty hints which survive point
to a larger acquaintance with European flora and fauna than with Asiatic;
to a southward course, whilst silent about westward migration; the
movement of races inclines from less genial to more genial zones; the
traditions of certain branches, as the Greeks, tell of them as
autochthones, or born on the soil where they are found; and the judgment
of experts is decisive as to the greater nearness of the European
languages to the original speech as contrasted with Sanskrit and Iranian.
These are the principal reasons adduced in support of the theory of a
European origin. Benfey places the old Aryan home in the neighbourhood of
the Black Sea, Schrader and Geiger in Middle Germany, Karl Penka in
Scandinavia. But in speculating on the exact habitation of congeries of
tribes requiring vast tracts of country for support, no rigid boundaries
can be fixed, and there is room for the play of both theories, the more so
as theories they must remain.[34]

At the back of this unsettled question lies the interesting subject of the
civilisation of pre-Aryan races on the European-Asiatic Continent. In the
Newer Stone Age this continent was inhabited by races of short stature,
with long and narrow skulls, and probably dark complexions, races whom the
Aryans, a tall, round-skulled, fair-complexioned race, conquered, and with
whom they so largely intermingled that the varieties of fair and dark
people in Europe at this day, speaking an Aryan language, are past finding
out. Indeed, there are probably no unmixed races throughout Europe and
Asia; the conquering race imposed its language on the conquered, and thus
is explained the community of speech without community of race which must
be recognised in the composite European peoples.

With this qualification the kinship of the Aryan-language-speaking peoples
is demonstrated, and the like kind of evidence by which this is proved has
been applied to establish the identity of their mythologies, legends, and
folk-tales. The meaning of the proper names of these once determined, the
key to the meaning of the myth or tale was clear; because, it is
contended, the names contain the germs or oldest surviving part. This is
to make the last first; but the result, as already shown in the Aryan
light-and-darkness myths, has been to bring out a few striking
correspondences in Greek and Vedic names, although by no means so intimate
and frequent as the solar mythologists assume. The uniform behaviour of
the untutored mind before like phenomena to which barbaric myth witnesses
prepares us for general correspondences, but not in such details as we
find in the Aryan group. On what theory these, notably in the case of the
folk-tales, are to be accounted for, it is not easy to say, for the mode
of their diffusion from India to Iceland is obscure. But the fact abides
that nursery stories told in Norway and Tyrol, in Scotland and the Deccan,
are identical. After allowing for local colouring and for changes incident
to the lapse of time, they are the variants of stories presumably related
in the Aryan fatherland at a period historically remote, and, moreover,
are told in words which are phonetically akin. Their resemblances in
minor incident and detail are not easily explained by theories of
borrowing, for apparently no trace of intercourse between the Asiatic
Aryans and the Aryans of extreme Western Europe occurs until after the
domiciling of the stories where we find them. Nor did they with such close
resemblances as appear between the German Faithful John and the Hindu Rama
and Luxman; between our own Cinderella, the German Aschenpüttel and the
Hindu Sodewa Bai, spring native from their respective soils.[35] And there
is just that unlikeness in certain details which might be expected from
the different positions and products of the several Aryan lands. They
explain, for example, the absence from Scandinavian folk-tale of creatures
like the elephant, the giant, ape, and turtle, which figure in the
Brahmanic.

When we turn to the great Aryan epics, the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_; the
_Volsungs_; the _Nibelungs_; _King Arthur and his Round Table_; the
_Ramâyanâ_ and the _Mahâ Bhâratâ_; the _Shah Nameh_, and so forth, we find
similarities of incident and episode which point to a common derivation
from old Aryan myth. That common synonyms occur in cognate languages is to
be expected, but so far as the names and the characteristics of the heroes
and heroines are concerned, the phonetic identity is proven in a far less
number of cases than the solar mythologists, working on their too
exclusive method, argue. The key which for them unlocks the meaning of
every Aryan myth is Sanskrit. In tracing the history of the Indo-European
family of speech, it served as the starting-point, because it has more
than any other member preserved the roots and suffixes, if not in their
oldest, still in their most accessible form. And in tracing the course of
Indo-European mythology, it is in the Vedic texts, chiefly the most
ancient, the _Rig-Veda_, that we find the materials for comparative study,
since in these venerable hymns of a Bible older than our own are preserved
the earliest recorded forms of that mythology. That is to say, we have not
in any European branch of Aryan speech any documentary relic of the age of
the _Rig-Veda_, otherwise we might find ourselves in possession of more
ancient relics of that speech. So that although the value of Sanskrit as
the guide without which knowledge of the Aryan mother-tongue would have
remained vague, indeed have been beyond reach, cannot be over-estimated,
we must not accept as of universal worth what is local and special in
it.[36]

The phonetic kinship and actual identity which comparative philologists
have sought to establish between the proper names of gods and heroes of
the Greek and Vedic mythologies (for the inquiry has been chiefly
restricted to these two), is based on the collection of rules by which we
can at once tell what sounds in one language correspond to those of its
kindred tongues, called, after its discoverer, “Grimm’s Law.” This law
gave the quietus to theories of common origin and variation of words based
on specious resemblances (theories satirised by Dean Swift in his
derivation of _ostler_ from _oatstealer_), and introduced a scientific
method into etymological study.

The varying pronunciation of certain words among the Aryan-speaking
peoples which were common to them was discovered by Grimm to be constant;
for example, a Greek _th_ answers to an English _d_, and, _vice versâ_, a
German _s_ or _z_ to an English _t_, and so forth, so that by comparing
these altered forms the common form from which they spring is reached.

At what fluent period in the history of the Aryan languages these changes
of one sound into another were induced is unknown, nor are their precise
causes easy of ascertainment, being referable to physical influences,
climatal and local, which in the course of time brought about changes in
the organs of speech, such, for example, as make our _th_ so difficult of
pronunciation to a German, in whose language _d_ takes its place, as
_drei_ for _three_, _durstig_ for _thirsty_, _dein_ for _thine_, etc. We
may note tendencies to variation in children of the same household, their
prattle often affording striking illustration of Grimm’s law, and it is
easy to see that among semi-civilised and isolated tribes, where no check
upon the variations is imposed, they would tend to become fixed and give
rise to new dialects.

Tracing the operation of that law in the changes in proper names in Greek
and Vedic mythology, their correlation is proved in a few important
instances. The Greek _Zeus_, the Latin _Deus_ (whence French _Dieu_ and
our _deity_, and also _deuce_), the Lithuanian _Diewas_, and the Sanskrit
_Dyaus_ all come from an old Aryan root, _div_ or _dyu_, meaning “to
shine.” The Sanskrit _dyu_, as a noun means “sky” or “day,” and in the
_Veda Dyaus_ is the bright sky or heaven. _Varuna_, the noblest figure in
the Vedic religion, the “enveloper” or all-surrounding heaven, is cognate
with the Greek _Ouranos_ or _Uranus_, the common root being _var_, “to
veil” or “cover.” Agni, the fire-god, to whom the larger number of hymns
occur in the _Veda_, is related to the Latin _ignis_, fire, and so forth.

The heavens and the earth and all that in them is are the raw material on
which man works, and the comparative philologists have established exactly
what might have been predicated, the nature-origin of the Greek, Vedic,
and other Aryan myths. They might well have rested content with this
confirmation which their method gives to results arrived at by other
methods, and not weakened or discredited it by applying it all round to
every leading name in Aryan myth. For this has only revealed the
fundamental differences among themselves as to the etymologies and
meanings of such names. But not satisfied with the demonstration that the
majestic epics have their germs in the phenomena of the natural world, and
the course of the day and year, they strain the evidence by contending
that “there is absolutely nothing left for further analysis in the
stories;” that their “resemblances in detail defy the influences of
climate and scenery;”[37] that every incident has its birth in the journey
of the sun, the death of the dawn, the theft of the twilight by the powers
of darkness, evidence which, in Sir George Cox’s words, “not long hence
will probably be regarded as excessive.”

They are nature-myths; but, and in this is the secret of their enduring
life, they are much more than that. The impetus that has shaped them as we
now know them came from other forces than clouds and storms.

Without such caution as these remarks are designed to supply, any reader
of the _Mythology of the Aryan Nations_ would conclude that the
philological method had proved the meteorological origin of every epic and
folk-tale among the Indo-European peoples. He would learn that, in a way
rudely analogous to the supernatural guidance of the Christian Church, the
several Aryan tribes had received from the fathers of the race an
unvarying canon of interpretation of the primitive myths, a canon
seemingly preserved with the jealous veneration with which the Jew
regarded the _Thorah_, and the Brahman the _Veda_. He would also learn
that the details of Norse and classic myth can be traced to the _Veda_,
that these details, not of incident alone, but of thought and expression,
survived unimpaired by time and untouched by circumstance, whilst, strange
to say, the more prominent names and the leading characters became
obscured in their meaning. Strange indeed, and not true. For what are the
facts?

Long before the hymns of the _Rig-Veda_ existed as we know them (and they
have remained an inviolate sacred text since 600 B.C., when every verse,
word, and syllable were counted) the Aryan tribes had swarmed from their
parent hive across boundless steppes and over winding mountain passes,
some to the westward limits of Europe, others southward into Hindustan.
Among the slender intellectual capital of which they stood possessed was
the common mythology of their savage ancestors, in which, as we have seen,
sun and moon, storm and thunder-cloud, and all other natural phenomena,
were credited with personal life and will. But that mythology had
certainly advanced beyond the crude primitive form and entered the heroic
stage, wherein the powers of nature were half human, half divine. Their
language had passed into the inflective or highest stage, and had
undergone such changes that the relationship between its several groups
and their origin from one mother-tongue was obscured, and remained so
until laid bare in our day. In short, the Aryan tribes had attained no
mean state of civilisation, some being more advanced than the others,
according as external circumstances helped or hindered, and one by one
they passed from the condition of semi-civilised nomads to become fathers
and founders of nations that abide to this day.

These being the facts to which language itself bears witness, how was it
possible for their mythologies, _i.e._ their stock of notions about
things, to remain unaffected and secure of transmission without organic
change? The myths, unfixed in literary form, yielded themselves with ease
as vehicles of new ideas; their ancient meaning, already faded, paled
before the all-absorbing significance of present facts. These were more
potent realities than the kisses of the dawn; the human and the personal,
in its struggles, of mightier interest than the battle of rosy morn or
purple eve with the sons of thunder; and Homer’s music would long since
have died away were Achilles’ “baneful wrath” but a passively-told tale of
the sun’s grief for the loss of the morning.

In brief, the complex and varying influences which have transformed the
primitive myth are the important factors which the solar theorists have
omitted in their attempted solution of the problem. They have forgotten
the part which, to borrow a term from astronomy, “personal equation” has
played. They have not examined myth in the light of the long history of
the race; and the new elements which it took into itself, while never
wholly ridding itself of the old, have escaped them. They have secured a
mechanical unity, whereas, by combination of the historical with their own
method, they might have secured a vital unity.

To all which classic myth itself bears record. The Greeks were of Aryan
stock, but the time of their settlement is unknown. The period between
this and the Homeric age was, however, long enough to admit of their
advance to the state of a nation rejoicing in the fulness of intellectual
life. They remembered not from what rock they were hewn, from what pit
they were digged. The nature-gods of their remote ancestors had long since
changed their meteorological character, and appeared in the likeness of
men, or, at least, played very human pranks on Olympus. In the _Veda_ the
primitive nature-myth, although exalted and purified, is persistent; under
one name or another it is still the ceaseless battle between the darkness
and the light; Dyaus was still the bright sky, the cattle of Siva were
still the clouds. But the Greek of Homer’s time, and his congener in the
far north, had forgotten all that; the war in heaven was transferred to
the strife of gods and men on the shores of the Hellespont and by the
bleak seaboard of the Baltic. Their gods and goddesses, improved by age
and experience, put off their physical and put on the ethical; the
heaven-father became king of gods and men, source of order, law, and
justice; the sun and the dawn, Apollo and Athênê, became wisdom, skill,
and guardianship incarnate. And the story of human vicissitudes found in
solar myth that “pattern of things in the heavens” which conformed to its
design.

Thus Homer, in whose day the old nature-myth had become confused with the
vague traditions of veritable deeds of kings and heroes but dimly
remembered, touched it as with heavenly fire unquenchable. The siege of
Troy, so say the solar mythologists, “is a repetition of the daily siege
of the east by the solar powers that every evening are robbed of their
highest treasures in the west.” It is surely a truer instinct which,
recognising the physical framework of the great epics, feels that the
vitality which inheres in them is due to whatever of human experience,
joy, and sorrow is the burden of their immortal song. As to the repulsive
features of Greek myth, one can neither share the distress of the solar
theorists nor feel their difficulties. Both are self-created, and are
aggravated by suggestions, serious or otherwise, of “periods of temporary
insanity through which the human mind had to pass,” as the rude health of
childhood is checked by whooping-cough and measles. They are explained by
the persistence with which the lower out of which man has emerged asserts
itself, as primary rocks pierce through and overlap later strata.

The ancestors of the Aryans were savages in the remote past, and the “old
Adam” was never entirely cast out; indeed it is with us still. There are
superstitions and credulities in our midst, in drawing-rooms as well as
gipsy camps, quite as gross in nature, if less coarse in guise, as those
extant among the Greeks. The future historian of our time, as he turns
over the piles of our newspapers, will find contrasts of ignorance and
culture as startling as any existing in the land of Homer, of Archimedes,
and Aristotle. Spirit-rapping and belief in the “evil eye” have their cult
among us, although Professor Huxley’s _Hume_ can be bought for two
shillings, and knowledge has free course. And it certainly accords best
with all that we have learnt as to the mode of human progress to believe
that the old lived into the new, than that the old had been cast out, but
had gained re-entry, making the last state of the Greeks to be worse than
the first.

In this matter the Vedic hymns do not help us much. The conditions under
which they took the form that insured their transmission are _ipso facto_
as of yesterday, compared with the period during which man’s endeavour was
made to get at that meaning of his surroundings wherein is found the germ
of myth throughout the world. They are the products of a relatively
highly-civilised time; the conception of sky and dawn as living persons
has passed out of its primitive simplicity; these heavenly powers have
become complex deities; there is much confounding of persons, the same god
called by one or many names. The thought is that of an age when moral
problems have presented themselves for solution, and the references to
social matters indicate a settled state of things far removed from the
fisher and the hunter stage. Nevertheless there lurk within these sacred
writings survivals of the lower culture, traces of coarse rites, bloody
sacrifices, of repulsive myths of the gods, and of cosmogonies familiar to
the student of barbaric myth and legend.

Enough has been said to show that the extreme and one-sided
interpretations of the solar mythologists are due to a one-sided method.
The philological has yielded splendid results; this the solar theorists
have done; the historical yields results equally rich and fertile; this
they have left undone. Language has given us the key to the kinship
between the several members of the great body of Aryan myths; the study of
the historical evolution of myths, the comparison of these, without regard
to affinity of speech, will give us the key to the kinship between savage
interpretation of phenomena all the world over. The mythology of Greek and
Bushman, of Kaffir and Scandinavian, of the Red man and the Hindu, springs
from the like mental condition. It is the uniform and necessary product of
the human mind in the childhood of the race.


§ V.

BELIEF IN METAMORPHOSIS INTO ANIMALS.

The belief that human beings could change themselves into animals has been
already alluded to, but in view of its large place in the history of
illusions, some further reference is needful.

Superstitions which now excite a smile, or which seem beneath notice, were
no sudden phenomena, appearing now and again at the beck and call of
wilful deceivers of their kind. That they survive at all, like organisms,
atrophied or degenerate, which have seen “better days,” is evidence of
remote antiquity and persistence. Every seeming vagary of the mind had
serious importance, and answered to some real need of man as a sober
attempt to read the riddle of the earth, and get at its inmost secret.

So with this belief. It is the outcome of that early thought of man which
conceived a common nature and fellowship between himself and brutes, a
conception based on rude analogies between his own and other forms of
life, as also between himself and things without life, but having motion,
be they waterspouts or rivers, trees or clouds, especially these last,
when the wind, in violent surging and with howling voice, drove them
across the sky. Where he blindly, timidly groped, we walk as in the light,
and with love that casts out fear. Where rough resemblances suggested to
him like mental states and actions in man and brute, the science of our
time has, under the comparative method, converted the guess into a
certainty; not to the confirmation of his conclusions, but to the proof of
identity of structure and function, to the demonstrating of a common
origin, however now impassable the chasm that separates us from the lower
animals.

The belief in man’s power to change his form and nature is obviously
nearly connected with the widespread doctrine of metempsychosis, or the
passing of the soul at death into one or a series of animals, generally
types of the dead man’s character, as where the timid enter the body of a
hare, the gluttonous that of a swine or vulture.

  “Fills with fresh energy another form,
   And towers an elephant or glides a worm;
   Swims as an eagle in the eye of noon,
   Or wails a screech-owl to the deaf, cold moon,
   Or haunts the brakes where serpents hiss and glare,
   Or hums, a glittering insect, in the air.”

But while in transmigration the soul returns not to the body which it had
left, transformation was only for a time, occurring at stated periods, and
effected by the will of the transformed, or by the aid of sorcery or
magic, or sometimes imposed by the gods as a punishment for impious
defiance and sin.

Other causes, less remote, aided the spread of a belief to which the mind
was already inclined. Among these were the hallucinations of men who
believed themselves changed into beasts, and who, retreating to caves and
forests, issued thence howling and foaming, ravening for blood and
slaughter; hallucinations which afflicted not only single persons, as in
the case of Nebuchadnezzar, whose milder monomania (he, himself, saying in
the famous prize poem:--

  “As he ate the unwonted food,
     ‘It may be wholesome, but it is not good’”),

rather resembled that of the daughters of Prætus, who believed themselves
cows, but which also spread as virulent epidemic among whole classes. It
is related that, in 1600, multitudes were attacked by the disease known as
lycanthropy, or wolf-madness (from Greek, _lukos_, a wolf, and
_anthropos_, a man), and that they herded and hunted in packs, destroying
and eating children, and keeping in their mountain fastnesses a cannibal
or devil’s sabbath, like the nocturnal meetings of witches and demons
known as the Witches’ Sabbath. Hundreds of them were executed on their own
confession, but some time elapsed before the frightful epidemic, and the
panic which it caused, passed away. Besides such delusions, history down
to our own time records instances where a morbid innate craving for blood,
leading sometimes to cannibalism, has shown itself. Mr. Baring-Gould, in
his _Book of Werewolves_, cites a case from Gall of a Dutch priest who had
such a desire to kill and to see killed that he became chaplain to a
regiment for the sake of witnessing the slaughter in battle. But still
more ghastly are the notorious cases of Elizabeth, a Hungarian lady of
title, who inveigled girls into her castle and murdered them, that she
might bathe her body in human blood to enhance her beauty; and of the
Maréchal de Retz who, cursed with the abnormal desire to murder children,
allured them with promises of dainties into his kitchen, and killed them,
inhaling the odour of their blood with delight, and then burned their
bodies in the huge fireplace in the room devoted to these horrors. When
the deed was done the Maréchal would lie prostrate with grief, “would toss
weeping and praying on a bed, or recite fervent prayers and litanies on
his knees, only to rise with irresistible craving to repeat the crime.”

Such instances as the foregoing, whether of delusion or morbid desire to
destroy, are among secondary causes; they may contribute, but they do not
create, being inadequate to account for the world-wide existence of
transformation myths. The animals which are the supposed subject of these
vary with the habitat, but are always those which have inspired most
dread from their ferocity. In Abyssinia we find the man-hyæna; in South
Africa, the man-lion; in India, the man-tiger; in Northern Europe, the
man-bear; and in other parts of Europe the man-wolf, or werewolf (from
A.-S. _wer_, a man).

Among the many survivals of primitive thought in the Greek mythology,
which are the only key to its coarser features, this of belief in
transformation occurs, and, indeed, along the whole line of human
development it appears and re-appears in forms more or less vivid and
tragic. The gods of the south, as of the north, came down in the likeness
of beasts and birds, as well as of men, and among the references to these
myths in classic writers, Ovid, in the _Metamorphoses_, tells the story of
Zeus visiting Lykaon, king of Arcadia, who placed a dish of human flesh
before the god to test thereby his omniscience. Zeus detected the trick,
and punished the king by changing him into a wolf, so that his desire
might be towards the food which he had impiously offered to his god.

  “In vain he attempted to speak; from that very instant
   His jaws were bespluttered with foam, and only he thirsted
   For blood, as he raged amongst flocks and panted for slaughter.
   His vesture was changed into hair, his limbs became crooked.
   A wolf--he retains yet large traces of his ancient expression,
   Hoary he is as afore, his countenance rabid,
   His eyes glitter savagely still, the picture of fury.”

But we may pass from this and such-like tales of the ancients to the grim
realities of the belief in mediæval times.

If wolves abounded, much more did the werewolf abound. According to Olaus
Magnus, the sufferings which the inhabitants of Prussia and neighbouring
nations endured from wolves were trivial compared with the ravages wrought
by men turned into wolves. On the feast of the Nativity, these monsters
were said to assemble and then disperse in companies to kill and plunder.
Attacking lonely houses, they devoured all the human beings and every
other animal found therein. “They burst into the beer-cellars and there
they empty the tuns of beer or mead, and pile up the empty casks one above
another in the middle of the cellar, thus showing their difference from
natural wolves.” In Scandinavia it was believed that some men had a second
skin out of which they could slip and appear in the shape of a beast.
Perhaps the phrase “to jump out of one’s skin” is a relic of this notion.
The Romans believed that the werewolf simply effected the change by
turning his skin inside out, hence the term “versipellis,” or
“skin-changer.” So in mediæval times it was said that the wolf’s skin was
under the human, and the unhappy suspects were hacked and tortured for
signs of such hairy growth. Sometimes the change was induced, it is said,
by putting on a girdle of human skin round the waist; sometimes by the use
of magical ointment. Whatever the animal whose shape a man took could do,
that he could do, plus such power as he possessed in virtue of his
manhood or acquired by sorcery, his eyes remaining as the only features by
which he could be recognised. If he was not changed himself, some charm
was wrought on the eyes of onlookers whereby they could see him only in
the shape which he was supposed to assume. The genuine monomaniacs aided
such an illusion. The poor demented one who conceived himself a dog or a
wolf, who barked, and snapped, and foamed at the mouth, and bit savagely
at the flesh of others, was soon clothed by a terror-stricken fancy in the
skin of either brute, and believed to have the canine or lupine appetite
in addition to his human cunning. The imagination thus projects in visible
form the spectres of its creation; the eye in this, as in so much else,
sees the thing for which it looks. Some solid foundation for the belief
would, however, exist in the custom among warriors of dressing themselves
in the skins of beasts to add to their ferocious appearance. And it was
amidst such that the remarkable form of mania in Northern Europe known as
the Berserkr rage (“bear-sark” or “bear-skin” wearer) arose. Working
themselves by the aid of strong drink or drugs and contagious excitement
into a frenzy, these freebooters of the Northland sallied forth to break
the backbones and cleave the skulls of quiet folk and unwary travellers.
As with flashing eyes and foaming mouth they yelled and danced, seemingly
endowed with magic power to resist assault by sword or club, they aroused
in the hysterically disposed a like madness, which led to terrible crimes,
and which died away only as the killing of one’s fellows became less the
business of life. History supplies many examples of strange mental
epidemics which sped through towns and provinces in mediæval times. They
were induced by religious enthusiasm and other extreme and harmful forms
of mental stimulation, the most notorious being the great St. Vitus’
dance, and the procession of Flagellants, to which in their mad orgies the
hysterical ceremonies of barbarous tribes correspond. Of that tendency
towards imitation which these freaks of erratic and unbalanced minds
foster Dr. Carpenter[38] quotes an illustration from Zimmerman. A nun in a
large convent in France began to mew like a cat, and shortly afterwards
other nuns also mewed. At last all the nuns mewed every day at a given
time and for several hours together. And this cat’s concert was only
stopped by the military arriving and threatening to whip the nuns.

During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries the belief in men-beasts
reached its maximum, and met with no tender treatment at the hands of a
church whose founder had manifested such soothing pity towards the
“possessed” of Galilee and Judæa. That church had a cut-and-dried
explanation of the whole thing, and applied a sharp and pitiless remedy.
If the devil, with countless myrmidons at his command, was “going to and
fro in the earth, and walking up and down in it,” what limit could be put
to his ingenuity and arts? Could he not as easily change a man into a wolf
or a bear as a woman into a cat? and had not each secured this by a
compact with him, the foe of God and His Church? The evidence in support
of the one was as clear and cogent as in support of the other; hence
werewolf hunting and burning became as Christian a duty and as paying a
profession as witch-smelling and torturing. Any cruelty was justified by
its perpetrators when the object in view was the vindication of the
majesty of God; and not until the advancing intelligence of men recoiled
against the popular explanations of witchcraft and lycanthropy were the
laws against both repealed.

Those explanations were survivals of savage mental philosophy blended with
a crude theology. To the savage, all diseases are the work of evil
spirits. If a man hurts himself against a stone, the demon in the stone is
the cause. If the man falls suddenly ill, writhes or shrieks in his pain,
the spirit which has smuggled itself in with the food or the drink or the
breath is twisting or tearing him; if he has a fit, the spirit has flung
him; if he is in the frenzy of hysteria, the spirit within him is laughing
in fiendish glee. And when the man suddenly loses his reason, goes, as
people say, “out of his mind,” acts and looks no longer like his former
self, still more does this seem the work of an evil agent within him. It
is kindred with the old belief that the sickly and ugly infant had been
left in the cradle by the witch in place of the child stolen by her before
its baptism.[39] And the thing to do is to find some mode of conjuring or
frightening or forcing the demon out of the man, just as it became a
sacred duty to watch over the newly-born until the sign of the cross had
been made on its forehead, and the regenerating water sprinkled over it.

“Presbyter is but old priest writ large.” And the theory of demoniacal
agency was but the savage theory in a more elaborate guise. To theologians
and jurists it was a sufficing explanation; it fitted in with the current
notions of the government of the universe, and there was no need to frame
any other. Body and mind were to them as separate entities as they are to
the savage and the ignorant. Each regarded the soul as independent of the
body, and framed his theories of occasional absence therefrom accordingly.
But science has taught us to know ourselves not as dual, but as one. She
lays her finger on the subtle, intricate framework of man’s nervous
system, and finds in the derangement of this the secret of those delusions
and illusions which have been so prolific in agony and suffering. She
makes clear how the yielding to morbid tendencies can still foster
delusions, which, if no longer the subject of pains and penalties in the
body politic, are themselves ministers of vengeance in the body where they
arise. And in the recognition of a fundamental unity between the physical
and the mental, in the healthy working of the one as dependent on the
wholesome care of the other, she finds not only the remedy against mental
derangement and all forms of harmful excitement, but also the prevention
which is better than cure.

Traditions of transformation of men into beasts are not confined to the
Old world.[40] In Dr. Rink’s _Tales of the Eskimo_ there are numerous
stories both of men and women who have assumed animal form at will, as
also incidental references to the belief in stories such as that telling
how an Eskimo got inside a walrus skin, so that he might lead the life of
that creature. And among the Red races, that rough analogy which led to
the animal being credited with life and consciousness akin to the human,
still expresses itself in thought and act. If even now it is matter of
popular belief in the wilds of Norway that Finns and Lapps, who from
remote times have passed as skilful witches and wizards, can at pleasure
assume the shape of bears, the common saying, according to Sir George
Dasent, about an unusually daring and savage beast being, “that can be no
Christian bear,” we may not be surprised that lower races still ascribe
power of interchange to man and brute. The werewolf superstition is extant
among the North-Western Indians, but free from those diabolical features
which characterised it in mediæval times among ourselves. It takes its
place in barbaric myth generally, and although it may have repellent or
cruel elements, it was never blended with belief in the demoniacal. The
Ahts say that men go into the mountains to seek their manitou (that is,
the personal deity, generally the first animal seen by a native in the
dream produced by his fasting on reaching manhood), and, mixing with
wolves, are after a time changed into these creatures. Although the
illustration bears more upon what has to be said concerning the barbaric
belief in animal-ancestors, it has some reference to the matter in hand to
cite the custom among the Tonkanays, a wild and unruly tribe in Texas, of
celebrating their origin by a grand annual dance. One of them, naked as he
was born, is buried in the earth, then the others, clothed in wolf-skins,
walk over him, sniff around him, howl in wolfish style, and then dig him
up with their nails.[41] The leading wolf solemnly places a bow and arrow
in his hands, and, to his inquiry as to what he must do for a living,
advises him “to do as the wolves do--rob, kill, and rove from place to
place, never cultivating the soil.” Dr. Brinton, in quoting the above from
Schoolcraft, refers to a similar custom among the ancient dwellers on
Mount Soracte.

As in past times among ourselves, so in times present among races such as
the foregoing, their wizards and shamans are believed to have power to
turn themselves as they choose into beasts, birds, or reptiles. By
whatever name these professional impostors are known, whether as
medicine-men, or, as in Cherokee, by the high-sounding title of
“possessors of the divine fire,” they have traded, and wherever credulity
or darkest ignorance abide, still trade on the fears and fancies of their
fellows by disguising themselves in voice and gait and covering of the
animal which they pretend to be. Among races believing in transformation
such tricks have free course, and the more dexterous the sorcerer who
could play bear’s antics in a bear’s skin proved himself in throwing off
the disguise and appearing suddenly as a man, the greater his success, and
the more firmly grounded the belief.

The whole subject, although presented here only in the barest outline,
would not be fitly dismissed without some reference to the survival of the
primitive belief in men-animals in the world-wide stories known as
beast-fables, in which animals act and talk like human beings. When to us
all nature was Wonderland, and the four-footed, the birds, and the fishes,
among our play-fellows; when in fireside tale and rhyme they spoke our
language and lived that free life which we then shared and can never share
again, the feeling of kinship to which the old fables gave expression may
have checked many a wanton act, and, if we learned it not fully then, we
may have taken the lesson to heart since--

  “Never to blend our pleasure or our pride
   With sorrow of the meanest thing that lives.”

And then those _Fables_ of Æsop, even with the tedious drawback of the
“moral,” as powder beneath the jam, did they not lighten for us in
school-days the dark passages through our Valpy (for the omniscient Dr.
William Smith was not then the tyro’s dread), and again give us communion
with the fowl of the air and the beast of the field? Now our mature
thought may interest itself in following the beast-myths to the source
whence Babrius and Phædrus, knowing not its springhead and antiquity, drew
their vivid presentments of the living world, and find in the storied East
the well-spring that fed the imagination of youngsters thousands of years
ago. Such tales have not fallen in the East to the low level which they
have reached here, because they yet accord in some degree with extant
superstitions in India, whereas in Europe they find little or nothing to
which they correspond. With some authorities the Egyptians have the credit
of first inventing the beast-fable, but among them, as among every other
advanced race, such stories are the remains of an earlier deposit; relics
of a primitive philosophy in which wisdom and skill and cunning are no
monopoly of man’s. The fondness of the negro races, whose traditions are
not limited to South and Central Africa, for such fables is well known, as
witness the tales of which “Uncle Remus” is a type, and it is strikingly
illustrated in the history of the Vai tribe, who having, partly through
contact with whites, elaborated a system of writing, made the beast-fable
their earliest essay in composition.[42]

The evidence in support of the common ancestry of the languages spoken by
the leading peoples in Europe, and by such important historical races in
Asia as the Hindu and the Persian, has been already summarised. That
evidence, it was remarked, is considered corroborative not only of the
common origin of the myths on which the framework of the great
Indo-European epics rests, but also of the possession by the several clans
of a common stock of folk-lore and folk-tale, in which, of course, the
beast-fables are included, these being the relics in didactic or humorous
guise of that serious philosophy concerning the community of life in man
and brute amongst the barbaric ancestors of the Indo-Europeans, upon which
stress enough has been laid.

Even if the common origin be disproved, the evidence would be shifted
merely from local to general foundations, because the uniform attitude of
mind before the same phenomena would have further confirmation; but the
resemblances are too minute in detail to be explained by a theory of
independent creation of the tales where we now find them. The likenesses
are many, the unlikenesses are few, being the result of local colouring,
historical fact blended with the fiction, popular belief, and
superstition, all affected by the skill of the professional story-teller.
As in the numerous variants of the familiar Cinderella, Beauty and the
Beast, Punchkin, and the like, the same fairy prince or princess, the same
wicked magician and clever versatile Boots, peep through, disclosing the
near relationship of Hindu nursery tales to the folk-tales of Norway and
the Highlands, of Iceland and Ceylon, of Persia and Serbia, of Russia and
the lands washed by the Mediterranean.

In the venerable collection of _Buddhist Birth Stories_, now in course of
translation by Dr. Rhys Davids,[43] and to which is prefaced an
interesting introduction on the source and migration of folk-tales, we are
face to face with many a fable familiar to us in the _Æsop_ of our
school-days. There is the story of the Ass in the Lion’s Skin, not in
which, as Æsop has it, the beast dressed himself, but which the hawker put
on him to frighten the thieves who would steal his goods. Left one day to
browse in a field whilst his master refreshed himself at an inn, some
watchmen saw him, and, raising hue and cry, brought out the villagers,
armed with their rude implements. The ass, fearing death, made a noise
like an ass, and was killed. Long might he, adds the ancient moral--

      “Clad in a lion’s skin
  Have fed on the barley green;
  But he brayed!
  And that moment he came to ruin.”

The variants of this old fable are found in mediæval, in French, German,
Indian, and Turkish folk-lore, as are also those of the tortoise who lost
his life through “much speaking.” Desiring to emigrate, two ducks agreed
to carry him, he seizing hold of a stick which they held between their
beaks. As they passed over a village the people shouted and jeered,
whereupon the irate tortoise called out: “What business is it of yours?”
and, of course, thereby let go the stick and, falling down, split in two.
Therefore--

  “Speak wise words not out of season;
   You see how, by talking overmuch,
   The tortoise fell.”

In _Æsop_ the tortoise asks an eagle to teach him to fly; in Chinese
folk-lore he is carried by geese.

Jacob Grimm’s researches concerning the famous mediæval fable of “Reynard
the Fox” revealed the ancient and scattered materials out of which that
wonderful satire was woven, and there is no feature of the story which
reappears more often in Eastern and Western folk-lore than that cunning of
the animal which has been for the lampooner and the satirist the type of
self-seeking monk and ecclesiastic. When Chanticleer proudly takes an
airing with his family, he meets master Reynard, who tells him he has
become a “religious,” and shows him his beads, and his missal, and his
hair shirt, adding, in a voice “that was childlike and bland,” that he had
vowed never to eat flesh. Then he went off singing his Credo, and slunk
behind a hawthorn. Chanticleer, thus thrown off his guard, continues his
airing, and the astute hypocrite, darting from his ambush, seizes the
plump hen Coppel. So in Indian folk-tale a wolf living near the Ganges is
cut off from food by the surrounding water. He decides to keep holy day,
and the god Sakka, knowing his lupine weakness, resolves to have some fun
with him, and turns himself into a wild goat “Aha!” says the wolf, “I’ll
keep the fast another day,” and springing up he tried to seize the goat,
who skipped about so that he could not be taken. So Lupus gives it up, and
says as his solatium: “After all, I’ve not broken my vow.”

The Chinese have a story of a tiger who desired to eat a fox, but the
latter claimed exemption as being superior to the other animals, adding
that if the tiger doubted his word he could easily judge for himself. So
the two set forth, and, of course, every animal fled at sight of the
tiger, who, too stupid to see how he had been gulled, conceived high
respect for the fox, and spared his life.

Sometimes the tables are turned. Chanticleer gets his head out of
Reynard’s mouth by making him answer the farmer, and in the valuable
collection of Hottentot tales which the late Dr. Bleek, with some warrant,
called _Reynard in South Africa_, the cock makes the jackal say his
prayers, and flies off while the outwitted beast folds his hands and shuts
his eyes.

But further quotations must be resisted; enough if it is made clearer that
the beast-fable is the lineal descendant of barbaric conceptions of a life
shared in common by man and brute, and another link thus added to the
lengthening chain of the continuity of human history.


§ VI.

TOTEMISM: BELIEF IN DESCENT FROM ANIMAL OR PLANT.

In addition to the beliefs in the transformation of men into animals and
in the transmigration of souls into the bodies of animals, we find among
barbarous peoples a belief which is probably the parent of one and
certainly nearly related to both, namely, in descent from the animal or
plant, more often the former, whose name they bear. Its connection with
transmigration is seen in the belief of the Moquis of Arizona, that after
death they live in the form of their totemic animal, those of the deer
family becoming deer, and so on through the several gentes. The belief
survives in its most primitive and vivid forms among two races, the
aborigines of Australia and the North American Indians. The word
“totemism,” given to it both in its religious and social aspects, is
derived from the Algonquin “dodaim” or “dodhaim,” meaning “clanmark.”
Among the Australians the word “kobong,” meaning “friend” or “protector,”
is the generic term for the animal or plant by which they are known. It is
somewhat akin in significance to the Indian words “manitou,” “oki,” etc.,
comprehending “the manifestations of the unseen world, yet conveying no
sense of personal unity,” which are commonly translated by the misleading
word “medicine;” hence “medicine-men.”

The family name, or second name borne by all the tribes in lineal descent,
and which corresponds to our surname, _i.e._ _super nomen_, or
“over-name,” is derived from names of beasts, birds, plants, etc., around
which traditions of their transformation into men linger. Sir George
Grey[44] says that there is a mysterious connection between a native and
his kobong. It is his protecting angel, like the “daimôn” of Socrates,
like the “genius” of the early Italian. “If it is an animal, he will not
kill one of the species to which it belongs, should he find it asleep, and
he always kills it reluctantly and never without affording it a chance of
escape. The family belief is that some one individual of the species is
their dearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime,” as, in Hindu
belief, when a Rajah was said to have entered at death into the body of a
fish, a “close time” was at once decreed. Among the Indian tribes we find
well-nigh the whole fauna and flora represented, their totems being the
Bear, Turtle, Deer, Snake, Eagle, Pike, Corn, Tobacco, etc. Like the
Australians, these tribes regarded themselves as being of the breed of
their particular animal-totem, and avoided hunting, slaying, and eating
(of which more presently) the creature under whose form the ancestor was
thought to be manifest. The Chippeways carried their respect even farther.
Deriving their origin from the dog, they at one time refrained from
employing their supposed canine ancestors in dragging their sledges. The
Bechuana and other people of South Africa will avoid eating their
tribe-animal or wearing its skin. The same prohibitions are found among
tribes in Northern Asia, and the Vogulitzi of Siberia, when they have
killed a bear, address it formally, maintaining “that the blame is to be
laid on the arrows and iron, which were made and forged by the Russians!”
Among the Delawares the Tortoise gens claimed supremacy over the others,
because their ancestor, who had become a fabled monster in their
mythology, bore their world on his back. The California Indians are in
interesting agreement with Lord Monboddo when, in claiming descent from
the prairie wolf, they account for the loss of their tails by the habit of
sitting, which, in course of time, wore them down to the stump! The
Kickapoos say their ancestors had tails, and that when they lost them the
“impudent fox sent every morning to ask how their tails were, and the bear
shook his fat sides at the joke.” The Patagonians are said to have a
number of animal deities, creators of the several tribes, some being of
the caste of the guanaco and others of the ostrich. In short, the group of
beliefs and practices found among races in the lower stages of culture
point to a widespread common attitude towards the mystery of life around
them. In speaking of totemism among the Red races Dr. Brinton thinks that
the free use of animate symbols to express abstract ideas, which he finds
so frequent, is the source of a confusion which has led to their claiming
literal descent from wild beasts. But the barbaric mind bristles with
contradictions and mutually destructive conceptions; nothing is too
wonderful, too _bizarre_, for its acceptance, and the belief in actual
animal descent is not the most remarkable or far-fetched among the
articles of its creed.

The subject of totemism is full of interest both on its religious and
social side:--

On its religious side it has given rise, or, if this be not conceded,
impetus, to that worship of animals which assuredly had its source in the
attribution of mysterious power through some spirit within them, making
them deity incarnate.

On its social side it has led to prohibitions which are inwoven among the
customs and prejudices of civilised communities. But, before speaking of
these prohibitions, the barbaric mode of reckoning descent should be
noticed.

The family name borne by most Australian tribes is perpetuated by the
children, whether boys or girls, taking their mother’s name. Precisely the
same custom is found among some American Indians, the children of both
sexes being of the mother’s clan. Among the Moquis of Arizona all the
members of each gens trace descent from a common ancestor; they are
regarded as brothers and sisters.[45] Now, the family, as we define it,
does not exist in savage communities, nor, as Mr. McLennan says in his
very remarkable work on _Primitive Marriage_, had “the earliest human
groups any idea of kinship, ... the physical root of which could be
discerned only through observation and reflection.” Where the relations
of the sexes were confused and promiscuous, the oldest system in which the
idea of blood-ties was expressed was a system of kinship through the
mother. The habits of the “much-married” primitive men made mistake about
any one’s mother less likely than mistake about his father; and, if in
civilised times it is, as the saying goes, a wise child that knows its own
father, he was, in barbarous times, a wise father who knew his own child.
Examples tracing the kinship through females, father and offspring being
never of the same clan, abound in both ancient and modern authorities, and
perhaps the most amusing one that can be given is found in Dr. Morgan’s
_Systems of Consanguinity_. He says that the “natives of the province of
Keang-se are celebrated among the natives of the other Chinese provinces
for the mode or form used by them in address, namely, ‘Laon peaon,’ which,
freely translated, means, ‘Oh, you old fellow, brother mine by some of the
ramifications of female relationship!’”[46]

The prohibitions arising out of or confirmed by totemism are two: 1.
Against intermarriage between those of the same name or crest. 2. Against
the eating of the totem by any member of the tribe called after it.

1. Among both Australians and Indians a man is forbidden to marry in his
own clan, _i.e._ any woman of his own surname or badge, no matter where
she was born or however distantly related to him. The Navajoes of Arizona
say that if they married in their own clan “their bones would dry up and
they would die.”

Were this practice of “Exogamy,” as marriage outside the totem-kin is
called, limited to one or two places, it might be classed among
exceptional local customs based on a tradition, say, of some heated
blood-feud between the tribes. But its prevalence among savage or
semi-savage races all the world over points to reasons the nature of which
is still a _crux_ to the anthropologists. The late Mr. McLennan, whose
opinion on such a matter is entitled to the most weight, connects it with
the custom of female infanticide, which, rendering women scarce, led at
once to polyandry, or one female to several males, within the tribe, and
to the capturing of women from other tribes. This last-named practice
strengthens Mr. McLennan’s theory. He cites numerous instances from past
and present barbarous races, and traces its embodiment in formal code
until we come to the mock relics of the custom in modern times, as, for
example, the harmless “survival” in bride-lifting, that is, stealing, as
in the word “cattle-lifting.”

Connected with this custom is the equally prevailing one which forbids
intercourse between relations, as especially between a couple and their
fathers and mothers-in-law, and which also forbids mentioning their names.
So far as the aversion which the savage has to telling his own name, or
uttering that of any person (especially of the dead) or thing feared by
him is concerned, the reason is not far to seek. It lies in that
confusion between names and things which marks all primitive thinking. The
savage, who shrinks from having his likeness taken in the fear that a part
of himself is being carried away thereby, regards his name as something
through which he may be harmed. So he will use all sorts of roundabout
phrases to avoid saying it, and even change it that he may elude his foes,
and puzzle or cheat Death when he comes to look for him. But why a
son-in-law should not see the face of his mother-in-law, for so it is
among the Navajoes, (where the offender would, they say, go blind), the
Aranaks of South America, the Caribs and other tribes of more northern
regions, the Fijians, Sumatrans, Dyaks, the natives of Australia, the
Zulus, in brief, along the range of the lower culture, is a question to
which no satisfactory answer has been given, and to which reference is
here made because of its connection with totemism.

2. That the animal which is the totem of the tribe should not be eaten,
even where men did not hesitate to eat men of another totem, is a custom
for which it is less hard to account. The division of flesh into two
classes of forbidden and permitted, of clean and unclean, with the
resulting artificial liking or repulsion for food which custom arising out
of that division has brought about, is probably referable to old beliefs
in the inherent sacredness of certain animals. The Indians of Charlotte
Island never eat crows, because they believe in crow-ancestors, and they
smear themselves with black paint in memory of that tradition; the
Dacotahs would neither kill nor eat their totems, and if necessity compels
these and like barbarians to break the law, the meal is preceded by
profuse apologies and religious ceremonies over the slain. Although the
aborigines of Victoria, who are to be ranked among the lowest savages
extant, devour the most loathsome things, worms, slugs, and vermin, they
have a classification of meats to be eaten or avoided. A Kumite is deeply
grieved when hunger compels him to eat anything which bears his name, but
he may satisfy his hunger with anything that is Krokee. The abstention of
the Brahmans from meat, the pseudo-revealed injunction to the Hebrews
against certain flesh-foods (has that against pork its origin in the
forgotten tradition of descent from a boar?), need no detailing here. But,
as parallels, some restrictions amongst the ancient dwellers in these
islands are of value. It was, according to Cæsar,[47] a crime to eat the
domestic fowl, or goose, or hare, and to this day the last-named is an
object of disgust in certain parts of Russia and Brittany. The oldest
Welsh laws contain several allusions to the magical character of the hare,
which was thought to change its sex every month or year, and to be the
companion of the witches, who often assumed its shape.[48] The revulsion
against horse-flesh as food may have its origin in the sacredness of the
white horses, which, as Tacitus remarks,[49] were kept by the Germans at
the public cost in groves holy to the gods, whose secrets they knew, and
whose decrees regarding mortals their neighings interpreted. That this
animal was a clan-totem among our forefathers there can be no doubt, and
the proofs are with us in the white horses carved in outline on the chalk
hills of Berkshire and the west, as in the names and crests of clan
descendants.

The totem is not only the clan-name indicating descent from a common
ancestor. It is also the clan-symbol, badge, or crest. Where the tribes
among whom it is found are still in the picture-writing stage, _i.e._ when
the idea is expressed by a portrait of the thing itself instead of by some
sound-sign--a stage in writing corresponding to the primitive stage in
language, when words were imitative--there we find the rude hieroglyphic
of the totem a means of intercourse between different tribes, as well as
with whites. A striking example of the use of such totemic symbols occurs
in a petition sent by some Western Indian tribes to the United States
Congress for the right to fish in certain small lakes near Lake Superior.

The leading clan is represented by a picture of the crane; then follow
three martens, as totems of three tribes; then the bear, the man-fish, and
the cat-fish, also totems. From the eye and heart of each of the animals
runs a line connecting them with the eye and heart of the crane, to show
that they are all of one mind, and the eye of the crane has also a line
connecting it with the lakes on which the tribes have their eyes, and
another line running towards Congress.

In the barbaric custom of painting or carving the totem on oars, on the
bows and sides of canoes, on weapons, on pillars in the front of houses,
and on the houses themselves; in tattooing it on various parts of the body
(in the latter case, in some instances, together with pictures of
exploits; so that the man carries on his person an illustrated history of
his own life) we have the remote and forgotten origin of heraldic emblems.
The symbols of civilised nations, as, _e.g._ the Imperial eagle, which so
many states of ancient and modern renown have chosen; the crests of
families of rank, with their fabulous monsters, as the cherub, the Greek
_gryps_, surviving in the griffin, the dragon, the unicorn, which, born of
rude fancy or terrified imagination, are now carved on the entrance-gates
to the houses of the great; the armorial bearings on carriages; the crest
engraven on ring or embossed on writing-paper, these are the lineal
descendants of the totem; and the Indians, who could see no difference
between their system of manitous and those of the white people, with their
spread-eagle or their lion-rampant, made a shrewd guess that would not
occur to many a _parvenu_ applying at the Heralds’ College for a crest.
The continuity is traceable in the custom of the Mexicans and other
civilised nations of painting the totemic animals on their banners, flags,
crests, and other insignia; and it would seem that we have in the totem
the key to the mystery of those huge animal-shaped mounds which abound on
the North American continent.

The arbitrary selection in the “ages of chivalry” of such arms as pleased
the knightly fancy or ministered to its pride, or, as was often the case,
resembled the name in sound, together with the ignorance then and till
recently existing as to the origin of crests, and also the discredit into
which a seemingly meaningless vanity had fallen, have made it difficult to
trace the survival of the totem in the crests even of that numerous
company of the Upper Ten who claim descent from warriors who came over
with the Conqueror. But there is no doubt that an inquiry conducted on the
lines suggested above, and not led into by-paths by false analogies, would
yield matter of interest and value. It would add to the evidence of that
common semi-civilised stage out of which we have risen. Such names as the
Horsings, the Wylfings, the Derings, the Ravens, the Griffins, perhaps
hold within themselves traces of the totem name of the horse, wolf, deer,
raven, and that “animal fantasticall,” the griffin. In Scotland we find
the clan Chattan, or the wild cat; in Ireland “the men of Osory were
called by a name signifying the wild red deer.” On the other hand such
names may have been given merely as nicknames (_i.e._ ekename or the
_added_ name, from _eke_, “also,” or “to augment”), suggested by the
physical or mental likeness to the thing after which they are called.

But it is time to turn to the religious significance of the totem, as
shown among races worshipping the animal which is their supposed ancestor.

At first glance this seems strong argument in support of Mr. Herbert
Spencer’s theory that all forms of religion, and all myth, have their
origin in ancestor worship. The mysterious power of stimulation, of
excitation to frenzy, or of healing and soothing, or of poisoning, which
certain plants possess, has been attributed to indwelling spirits, which,
as Mr. Spencer contends, are regarded as human and ancestral. Very many
illustrations of this occur, as, _e.g._ the worship of the Soma plant, and
its promotion as a deity among the Aryans; the use of tobacco in religious
ceremonies among the tribes of both Americas; whilst now and again we find
trees and plants as totems. The Moquis have a totem-kin called the
tobacco-plant, and also one called the seed-grass. One of the Peruvian
Incas was called after the native name of the tobacco-plant; and among the
Ojibways the buffalo grass was carried as a charm, and its god said to
cause madness.

In Algonquin myth “there is a spirit for the corn, another for beans,
another for squashes. They are sisters, and are very kind to each other.
There are spirits in the water, in fire, in all the trees and berries, in
herbs and in tobacco, in the grass.”

The worship of animals is on Mr. Spencer’s theory explained as due to the
giving of a nickname of some beast or bird to a remote ancestor, the
belief arising in course of time that such animal was the actual
progenitor, hence its worship. We call a man a bear, a pig, or a vampire,
in symbolic phrase, and the figure of speech remains a figure of speech
with us. But the savage loses the metaphor, and it crystallises into hard
matter-of-fact. So the traditions have grown, and Black Eagle, Strong
Buffalo, Big Owl, Tortoise, etc., take the shape of actual forefathers of
the tribe bearing their name and crest. According to the same theory the
adoration of sun, moon, and mountains, etc., is due to a like source. Some
famous chief was called the Sun; the metaphor was forgotten; the personal
and concrete, as the more easily apprehended, remained; hence worship of
the powers of nature “is a form of ancestor-worship, which has lost in a
still greater degree the character of the original.”[50]

The objection raised in these pages to the extreme application of the
solar theory applies with equal force to Mr. Spencer’s limitation of the
origin of myth and religion to one source. Having cleared Scylla, we must
not dash against Charybdis. Religion has its origin neither in fear of
ghosts, as Mr. Spencer’s theory assumes, nor in a perception of the
Infinite inherent in man, as Professor Max Müller holds. Rather does it
lie in man’s sense of vague wonder in the presence of powers whose force
he cannot measure, and his expressions towards which are manifold. There
is underlying unity, but there are, to quote St. Paul, “diversities of
operation.” There is just that surface unlikeness which one might expect
from the different physical conditions and their resulting variety of
subtle influences surrounding various races; influences shaping for them
their gods, their upper and nether worlds; influences of climate and soil
which made the hell of volcanic countries an abyss of sulphurous stifling
smoke and everlasting fire, and the hell of cold climates a place of
deathly frost; which gave to the giant-gods of northern zones their rugged
awfulness, and to the goddesses of the sunny south their soft and stately
grace. The theory of ancestor-worship as the basis of every form of
religion does not allow sufficient play for the vagaries in which the same
thing will be dressed by the barbaric fear and fancy, nor for the
imagination as a creative force in the primitive mind even at the lowest
at which we know it. And, of course, beneath that lowest lies a lower
never to be fathomed. We are apt to talk of primitive man as if his
representatives were with us in the black fellows who are at the bottom of
the scale, forgetting that during unnumbered ages he was a brute in
everything but the capacity by which at last the ape and tiger were
subdued within him. Of the beginnings of his _thought_ we can know
nothing, but the fantastic forms in which it is first manifest compel us
to regard him as a being whose feelings were uncurbed by reason. That
ancestor-worship is one mode among others of man’s attitude towards the
awe-begetting, mystery-inspiring universe, none can deny. That his
earliest temples, as defined sacred spots, were tombs; that he prayed to
his dead dear ones, or his dead feared ones, as the case may be, is
admitted. From its strong personal character, ancestor-worship was,
without doubt, one of the earliest expressions of man’s attitude before
the world which his fancy filled with spirits. It flourishes among
barbarous races to-day; it was the prominent feature of the old Aryan
religion; it has entered into Christian practice in the worship of saints,
and perhaps the only feature of religion which the modern Frenchman has
retained is the _culte des morts_. That it was a part of the belief of the
Emperor Napoleon III. the following extract from his will shows:--“We must
remember that those we love look down upon us from heaven and protect us.
It is the soul of my great Uncle which has always guided and supported me.
Thus will it be with my son also if he proves worthy of his name.”

But the worship of ancestors is not primal. The comparatively late
recognition of kinship by savages, among whom some rude form of religion
existed, tells against it as the earliest mode of worship. Moreover,
Nature is bigger than man, and this he was not slow to feel. Even if it be
conceded that sun-myth and sun-worship once arose through the nicknaming
of an ancestor as the Sun, we must take into account the force of that
imagination which enabled the unconscious myth-maker, or creed-maker, to
credit the moving orbs of heaven with personal life and will. The faculty
which could do that might well express itself in awe-struck forms without
intruding the ancestral ghost. Further, the records of the classic
religions, themselves preserving many traces of a primitive
nature-worship, point to an adoration of the great and bountiful, as well
as to a sense of the maleficent and fateful, in earth and heaven which
seem prior to the more concrete worship of forefathers and chieftains.

If for the worship of these last we substitute a general worship of
spirits, there seems little left on which to differ. As aids to the
explanation of the belief in animal ancestors and their subsequent
deification and worship, as of the lion, the bull, the serpent, etc., we
have always present in the barbaric mind the tendency to credit living
things, and indeed lifeless, but moving ones, with a passion, a will, and
a power to help or harm immeasurably greater than man’s. This is part and
parcel of that belief in spirits everywhere which is the key to savage
philosophy, and the growth of which is fostered by such secondary causes
as the worship of ancestors.


§ VII.

SURVIVAL OF MYTH IN HISTORY.

For proofs of the emergence of the higher out of the lower in philosophy
and religion, to say nothing of less exalted matters, whether the
beast-fable or the nursery rhyme, as holding barbaric thought in solution,
examples have necessarily been drawn from the mythology of past and
present savage races. But these are too remote in time or standpoint to
stir other than a languid interest in the reader’s mind; their purpose is
served when they are cited and classified as specimens. Not thus is it
with examples drawn nearer home from sources at which our young thirst for
the stirring and romantic was slaked. When we learn that famous names and
striking episodes are in some rare instances only transformed and
personified natural phenomena, or, as occurring everywhere, possibly
variants of a common legend, the far-reaching influence of primitive
thought comes to us in more vivid and exciting form. And although one
takes in hand this work of disenchantment in no eager fashion, the loss is
more seeming than real. Whether the particular tale of bravery, of
selflessness, of faithfulness, has truth of detail, matters little
compared with the fact that its reception the wide world over witnesses to
human belief, even at low levels, in the qualities which have given man
empire over himself and ever raised the moral standard of the race.
Moreover, in times like these, when criticism is testing without fear or
favour the trustworthiness of records of the past, whether of Jew or
Gentile, the knowledge of the legendary origin of events woven into sober
history prepares us to recognise how the imagination has fed the stream of
tradition, itself no mean tributary of that larger stream of history, the
purity of which is now subject of analysis. As a familiar and interesting
example let us take the story of William Tell.

Everybody has heard how, in the year 1307 (or, as some say, 1296) Gessler,
Vogt (or Governor) of the Emperor Albert of Hapsburg, set a hat on a pole
as symbol of the Imperial power, and ordered every one who passed by to do
obeisance to it; and how a mountaineer named Wilhelm Tell, who hated
Gessler and the tyranny which the symbol expressed, passed by without
saluting the hat, and was at once seized and brought before Gessler, who
ordered that as punishment Tell should shoot an apple off the head of his
own son. As resistance was vain, the apple was placed on the boy’s head,
when Tell bent his bow, and the arrow, piercing the apple, fell with it to
the ground. Gessler saw that Tell, before shooting, had stuck a second
arrow in his belt, and, asking the reason, received this for answer: “It
was for you; had I shot my child, know that this would have pierced your
heart.”

Now, this story first occurs in the chronicle of Melchior Russ, who wrote
at the end of the fifteenth century, _i.e._ about one hundred and seventy
years after its reputed occurrence. The absence of any reference to it in
contemporary records caused doubt to be thrown upon it three centuries
ago. Guillimann, the author of a work on Swiss antiquities, published in
1598, calls it a fable, but subscribes to the current belief in it because
the tale is so popular! The race to which he belonged is not yet extinct.
A century and a half later a more fearless sceptic, who said that the
story was of Danish origin, was condemned by the Canton of Uri to be burnt
alive, and in the well-timed absence of the offender his book was ordered
to be burnt by the common hangman. But the truth is great, and prevails.
G. von Wyss, the Swiss historian, has pointed out that the name of Wilhelm
Tell does not occur even once in the history of the three cantons, neither
is there any trace that a Vogt named Gessler ever served the house of
Hapsburg there. Moreover, the legend does not correspond to any fact of a
period of oppression of the Swiss at the hands of their Austrian rulers.

“There exist in contemporary records no instances of wanton outrage and
insolence on the Hapsburg side. It was the object of that power to obtain
political ascendancy, not to indulge its representatives in lust or wanton
insult,” and, where records of disputes between particular persons occur,
“the symptoms of violence, as is natural enough, appear rather on the side
of the Swiss than on that of the aggrandising Imperial house.”[51]

Candour, however, requires that the “evidence” in support of the legend
should be stated. There is the fountain on the supposed site of the
lime-tree in the market-place at Altdorf by which young Tell stood, as
well as the colossal plaster statue of the hero himself which confronts us
as we enter the quaint village. But more than this, the veritable
cross-bow itself is preserved in the arsenal at Zurich!

However, although the little Tell’s chapel, as restored, was opened with
a national _fête_, in the presence of two members of the Federal Council,
in June 1883,[52] the Swiss now admit in their school-teaching that the
story of the _Apfelschusz_ is legendary.

Freudenberger, who earned his death-sentence for affirming that the story
came from Denmark, was on the right track, for the following variant of it
is given by Saxo Grammaticus, a Danish writer of the twelfth century, who
puts it as happening in the year 950:--

    Nor ought what follows to be enveloped in silence. Palnatoki, for some
    time in the body-guard of King Harold (Harold Gormson, or Bluetooth),
    had made his bravery odious to many of his fellow-soldiers by the zeal
    with which he surpassed them. One day, when he had drunk too much, he
    boasted that he was so skilled a bowman that he could hit the smallest
    apple, set on the top of a stick some way off, at the first shot,
    which boast reached the ears of the king. This monarch’s wickedness
    soon turned the confidence of the father to the peril of the son, for
    he commanded that this dearest pledge of his life should stand in
    place of the stick, adding a threat that if Palnatoki did not at his
    first shot strike off the apple, he should with his head pay the
    penalty of making an empty boast. This command forced him to attempt
    more than he had promised, and what he _had_ said, reported by
    slanderous tongues, bound him to accomplish what he had _not_ said.
    Yet did not his sterling courage, though caught in the snare of
    slander, suffer him to lay aside his firmness of heart. As soon as the
    boy was led forth Palnatoki warned him to await the speeding of the
    arrow with calm ears and unbent head, lest by any slight movement of
    the body he should frustrate the archer’s well-tried skill. He then
    made him stand with his back towards him, lest he should be scared at
    the sight of the arrow. Then he drew three arrows from his quiver, and
    with the first that he fitted to the string he struck the apple. When
    the king asked him why he had taken more than one arrow from his
    quiver, when he was to be allowed to make but one trial with his bow,
    he made answer, “That I might avenge on thee the swerving of the first
    by the points of the others, lest perchance my innocence might have
    been punished, while your violence escaped scot-free.”[53]

Going farther northward we find tales corresponding in their main features
to the above, in the Icelandic _Saga_, the Vilkina; in the Norse _Saga_ of
Saint Olaf or Thidrik; and in the story of Harold, son of Sigurd. In the
Olaf _Saga_ it is said that the saint or king, desiring the conversion of
a brave heathen named Eindridi, competed with him in various athletic
sports, swam with him, wrestled with him, and then shot with him. Olaf
then dared Eindridi to strike a writing-tablet from off his son’s head
with an arrow, and bade two men bind the eyes of the child and hold the
napkin so that the boy might not move when he heard the whizz of the
arrow. Olaf aimed first, and the arrow grazed the lad’s head. Eindridi
then prepared to shoot, but the mother of the boy interfered and persuaded
the king to abandon this dangerous test of skill. The story adds that had
the boy been injured Eindridi would have revenged himself on the king.[54]

Somewhat like this, as from the locality might be expected, is the Faröe
Isles variant. King Harold challenges Geyti, son of Aslak, and, vexed at
being beaten in a swimming match, bids Geyti shoot a hazel-nut from off
his brother’s head. He consents, and the king witnesses the feat, when
Geyti

  “Shot the little nut away,
   Nor hurt the lad a hair.”

Next day Harold sends for the archer, and says:--

  “List thee, Geyti, Aslak’s son,
   And truly tell to me,
   Wherefore hadst thou arrows twain
   In the wood yestreen with thee?”

To which Geyti answers:--

  “Therefore had I arrows twain
   Yestreen in the wood with me,
   Had I but hurt my brother dear
   The other had pierced thee.”

With ourselves it is the burden of the ballad of William of Cloudeslee,
where the brave archer says:--

  “I have a sonne seven years old;
   Hee is to me full deere;
   I will tye him to a stake--
   All shall see him that bee here--
   And lay an apple upon his head,
   And goe six paces him froe;
   And I myself with a broad arroe
   Shall cleave the apple in towe.”

In the _Malleus Maleficarum_ Puncher, a magician on the Upper Rhine, is
required to shoot a coin from off a lad’s head; while, travelling
eastwards as far as Persia, we find the Tell myth as an incident in the
poem _Mantic Ultraïr_, a work of the twelfth century.

Thus far the variants of the legend found among Aryan peoples have been
summarised, and it is tempting to base upon this diffusion of a common
incident a theory of its origin among the ancestors of the Swiss and the
Norseman, the Persian and the Icelander. But it is found among non-Aryans
also. The ethnologist, Castrén, whose researches in Finland have secured a
valuable mass of fast-perishing materials, obtained this tale in the
village of Ultuwa. “A fight took place between some freebooters and the
inhabitants of the village of Alajärai. The robbers plundered every house,
and carried off amongst their captives an old man. As they proceeded with
their spoils along the strand of the lake a lad of twelve years old
appeared from among the reeds on the opposite bank, armed with a bow and
amply provided with arrows; he threatened to shoot down the captors unless
the old man, his father, was restored to him. The robbers mockingly
replied that the aged man would be given to him if he could shoot an apple
off his head. The boy accepted the challenge, pierced the apple and freed
his father.” Among a people in close contact with an Aryan race as the
Finns are in contact with both Swedes and Russians, the main incident of
the Tell story may easily have been woven into their native tales. But in
reference to other non-Aryan races Sir George Dasent, who has treated of
the diffusion of the Tell story very fully in the Introduction to his
_Popular Tales from the Norse_ (a reprint of which would be a boon to
students of folk-lore), says that it is common to the Turks and
Mongolians, and a legend of the wild Samoyedes, who never heard of Tell or
saw a book in their lives, relates it, chapter and verse, of one of their
marksmen. What shall we say, then, but that the story of this bold
mastershot was prominent amongst many tribes and races, and that it only
crystallised itself round the great name of Tell by that process of
attraction which invariably leads a grateful people to throw such mythic
wreaths, such garlands of bold deeds of precious memory, around the brow
of its darling champion. Of course the solar mythologists see in Tell the
sun or cloud deity; in his bow the storm-cloud or the iris; and in his
arrows the sun-rays or lightning darts.

This is a question which we may leave to the champions concerned to
settle. Apart from the evidence of the survival of legend in history, and
the lesson of caution in accepting any ancient record as gospel which we
should learn therefrom, it is the human element in the venerable tale
which interests us most.

Remote in time, far away in place, as is its origin, it moves us yet. The
ennobling qualities incarnated in some hero (whether he be real or ideal
matters not) meet with admiring response in the primitive listeners to the
story, else it would have been speedily forgotten. Thus does it retain for
us witness to the underlying oneness of the human heart beneath all
surface differences.

Widespread as a myth may be, it takes depth of root according to the more
or less congenial soil where it is dropped. That about Tell found
favourable home in the uplands and the free air of Switzerland; with us S.
George, falling on times of chivalry, had abiding place, as also, less
rugged of type than the Swiss marksman, had Arthur, the “Blameless King,”
who, if he ever existed, is smothered in overgrowth of legends both native
and imported.

For such cycle of tales as gathered round the name of Arthur, and on which
our youthhood was nourished, is as mythical as the wolf that suckled
Romulus and Remus. Modern criticism and research have thoroughly sifted
the legendary from the true, and if the past remains vague and shadowy, we
at least know how far the horizon of certainty extends. The criticism has
made short work of the romancing chronicles which so long did duty for
sober history, and has shown that no accurate knowledge of the sequence of
events is obtainable until late in the period of the English invasions.
Save in scattered hints here and there, we are quite in the dark as to the
condition of this island during the Roman occupation, whilst for anything
that is known of times prior to this, called for convenience
“pre-historic,” we are dependent upon unwritten records preserved in tombs
and mounds. The information gathered from these has given us some clue to
what manner of men they were who confronted the first Aryan immigrants,
and, enriched by researches of the ethnologist and philologist, enabled us
to trace the movements of races westwards, until we find old and new
commingled as one English-speaking folk.

All or any of which could not be known to the earlier chroniclers. When
Geoffry of Monmouth set forth the glory and renown of Arthur and his Court
he recorded and embellished traditions six hundred years old, without
thought of weighing the evidence or questioning the credibility of the
transmitters. Whether there was a king of that name who ruled over the
Silures, and around whom the remnant of brave Kelts rallied in their final
struggle against the invading hordes, and who, wounded in battle, died at
Glastonbury, and was buried, or rather sleeps, as the legend has it, in
the Vale of Avilion, “hath been,” as Milton says, “doubted heretofore, and
may again, with good reason, for the Monk of Malmesbury and others, whose
credit hath swayed most with the learned sort, we may well perceive to
have known no more of this Arthur nor of his doings than we now
living.”[55]

In the group of legends both of the Old and New World, which, the solar
theorists tell us, symbolise the long sleep of winter before the sweet
awakening of the spring, Arthur of course has place. “Men said he was not
dead, but by the will of our Lord Jesus Christ was in another place, and
men say that he will come again ... that there is written on his tomb this
verse:

  ‘Hic jacet Arthurus rex quondam, Rexque futurus.’”

So Charlemagne reposes beneath the Untersberg, waiting for the appointed
time to rise and do battle with anti-Christ; Tell slumbers ready-panoplied
to save Switzerland when danger threatens; the hero-deity of the
Algonquins, when he left the earth, promised to return, but has not,
wherefore he is called Glooskap, or the Liar; St. John sleeps at Ephesus
till the last days are at hand; and the Church militant awaits the return
of her Lord at the Second Advent.

The comparative mythologists say that Arthur is a myth, pure and simple, a
variant of Sigurd and Perseus; the winning of his famous sword but a
repetition of the story of the Teutonic and Greek heroes; the gift of
Guinevere as fatal to him as Helen to Menelaus; his knights but
reproductions of the Achaian hosts--much of which may be true; but the
romance corresponded to some probable event; it fitted in with the
national traditions. There were struggles between the Kelts and subsequent
invaders--Romans, Angles, Saxons, Jutes. There were brave chieftains who
led forlorn hopes or fought to the death in their fastnesses. There were,
in the numerous tribal divisions, petty kings and queens ruling over mimic
courts, with retinues of knights bent on chivalrous, unselfish service.
These were the nuclei of stories which were the early annals of the tribe,
the glad theme of bards and minstrels, and from which a long line of poets
to the latest singer of the _Idylls of the King_ have drawn the materials
of their epics. The fascination which such a cycle of tales had for the
people, especially in days when the ballad was history and poetry and all
literature rolled into one, was so strong, that the Church wisely imported
an element which gave loftier meaning to the knightly life, and infused
religious ardour into the camp and court. To the stories of Tristram and
Gawayne, already woven into the old romance, she added the half-Christian,
half-pagan, legend of the knights who left the feast at the Round Table to
travel across land and sea that they might free the enslaved, remove the
spell from the enchanted, and deliver fair women from the monsters of
tyranny and lust, setting forth on what in her eyes was a nobler quest--to
seek and look upon the San Graal, or Holy Vessel used by Jesus at the Last
Supper, and into which Joseph of Arimathea collected the blood and water
that streamed from the side of the crucified Jesus. This mystic cup, in
which we have probably a sacrificial relic of the old British religion
imported into the Christian incident with which it blended so well,
floated, according to Arthurian legend, suddenly into the presence of the
King and his Round Table knights at Camelot as they sat at supper, and was
as suddenly borne away, to be henceforth the coveted object of knightly
endeavour. Only the baptized could hope to behold it; to the unchaste it
was veiled: hence only they among the knights who were pure in heart and
life vowed to go in quest of the San Graal, and return not until they had
seen it. So to Sir Galahad, the “just and faithful,” Tennyson sings how
the sacred cup appeared--

  “Sometimes on lonely mountain meres
     I find a magic bark;
   I leap on board: no helmsman steers:
     I float till all is dark.
   A gentle sound, an awful light!
     Three angels bear the holy Grail:
   With folded feet, in stoles of white,
     On sleeping wings they sail.
   Ah, blessed vision! blood of God!
     My spirit beats her mortal bars,
   As down dark tides the glory slides,
     And, star-like, mingles with the stars.”

Whilst in such legends as the Arthurian group the grain of truth, if it
exists, is so embedded as to be out of reach, there are others concerning
actual personages, notably Cyrus and Charlemagne, not to quote other names
from both “profane” and sacred history, in which the fable can be
separated from the fact without difficulty. Enough is known of the life
and times of such men to detach the certain from the doubtful, as, _e.g._,
when Charlemagne is spoken of as a Frenchman and as a Crusader before
there was a French nation, or the idea of Crusades had entered the heads
of most Christian kings; and as in the legends of the infancy of Cyrus,
which are of a type related to like legends of the wonderful round the
early years of the famous.

This, however, by the way. Leaving illustration of the fabulous in heroic
story, it will be interesting to trace it through such a tale of pathos
and domestic life as the well-known one of Llewellyn and his faithful
hound, Gellert.

Whose emotions have not been stirred by the story of Llewellyn the Great
going out hunting, and missing his favourite dog; of his return, to be
greeted by the creature with more than usual pleasure in his eye, but with
jaws besmeared with blood; of the anxiety with which Llewellyn rushed into
the house, to find the cradle where had lain his beautiful boy upset, and
the ground around it soaked with blood; of his thereupon killing the dog,
and then seeing the child lying unharmed beneath the cradle, and sleeping
by the side of a dead wolf, from whose ravenous maw the faithful Gellert
had delivered it? Most of us, in our visits to North Wales, have stood by
Gellert’s grave at Beddgelert, little suspecting that the affecting story
occurs in the folk-lore of nearly every Aryan people, and of several
non-Aryan races, as the Egyptians and Chinese.

Probably it comes to us as many other tales have come, through collections
like the well-known _Gesta Romanorum_, compiled by mediæval monks for
popular entertainment. In the version given in that book the knight who
corresponds to Llewellyn, after slaying his dog, discovers that it had
saved his child from a serpent, and thereupon breaks his sword and departs
on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. But the monks were no inventors of such
tales; they recorded those that came to them through the pilgrims,
students, traders, and warriors who travelled from west to east and from
east to west in the Middle Ages, and it is in the native home of fable and
imagery the storied Orient, that we must seek for the earliest forms of
the Gellert legend. In the _Panchatantra_, the oldest and most celebrated
Sanskrit fable-book, the story takes this form:--An infirm child is left
by its mother while she goes to fetch water, and she charges the father,
who is a Brahman, to watch over it. But he leaves the house to collect
alms, and soon after this a snake crawls towards the child. In the house
was an ichneumon, a creature often cherished as a house pet, who sprang at
the snake and throttled it. When the mother came back, the ichneumon went
gladly to meet her, his jaws and face smeared with the snake’s blood. The
horrified mother, thinking it had killed her child, threw her water-jar at
it, and killed it; then seeing the child safe beside the mangled body of
the snake, she beat her breast and face with grief, and scolded her
husband for leaving the house.

We find the same story, with the slight difference that the animal is an
otter, in a later Sanskrit collection, the _Hitopadesa_, but we can track
it to that fertile source of classic and mediæval fable, the Buddhist
_Jâtakas_, or _Birth Stories_, a very ancient collection of fables, which,
professing to have been told by the Buddha, narrates his exploits in the
550 births through which he passed before attaining Buddhahood. In the
_Vinaya Pitaka_ of the Chinese Buddhist collection, which, according to
Mr. Beal, dates from the fifth century A.D., and is translated from
original scriptures supposed to have existed near the time of Asoka’s
council in the third century B.C., we have the earliest extant form of
the tale. That in the _Panchatantra_ is obviously borrowed from it, the
differences being in unimportant detail, as, for example, the nakula, or
mongoose, is killed by the Brahman on his return home, the wife having
neglected to take the child with her as bidden by him. He is filled with
sorrow, and then a Deva continues the strain:--

  “Let there be due thought and consideration,
   Give not way to hasty impulse,
   By forgetting the claims of true friendship
   You may heedlessly injure a kind heart (person)
   As the Brahman killed the nakula.”

The several versions of the story which could be cited from German,
Russian, Persian, and other Aryan folk-lore, would merely present certain
variations due to local colouring and to the inventiveness of the
narrators or transcribers; and, omitting these, it will suffice to give
the Egyptian variant or corresponding form, in which the tragical has
given place to the amusing, save, perhaps, in the opinion of the Wali.
This luckless person “once smashed a pot full of herbs which a cook had
prepared. The exasperated cook thrashed the well-intentioned but
unfortunate Wali within an inch of his life, and when he returned,
exhausted with his efforts at belabouring the man, he discovered among the
herbs a poisonous snake.”

In pointing to the venerable Buddhist _Birth Stories_ as the earliest
extant source of Aryan fables, it should be added that these were with the
Buddha and his disciples the favourite vehicle of carrying to the hearts
of men those lessons of gentleness and tenderness towards all living
things which are a distinctive feature of that non-persecuting religion.


§ VIII.

MYTH AMONG THE HEBREWS.

With the important exception of reference to the change effected in the
Jewish doctrine of spirits, and its resulting influence on Christian
theology, by the transformation of the mythical Ahriman of the old Persian
religion into the archfiend Satan, but slight allusion has been made in
these pages to the myths and legends of the Semitic race. Under this term,
borrowed from the current belief in their descent from Shem, are included
extant and extinct people, the Assyrians, Chaldeans or Babylonians,
Phœnicians, Arabs, Syrians, Jews, and Ethiopians.

The mythology of the Aryan nations has had the advantage of the most
scholarly criticism, and the light which this has thrown upon the racial
connection of peoples between whom all superficial likeness had long
disappeared, as well as upon the early condition of their common
ancestors, is of the greatest value as aid to our knowledge of the mode of
man’s intellectual and spiritual growth. And the comparisons made between
the older and cruder forms underlying the elaborated myth and the myths of
semi-barbarous races have supported conclusions concerning man’s
primitive state identical with those deduced from the material relics of
the Ancient and Newer Stone Ages, namely, that the savage races of to-day
represent not a degradation to which man has sunk, but a condition out of
which all races above the savage have, through much tribulation, emerged.
An important exception to this has, however, been claimed on behalf of at
least one branch of the Semitic race--namely, the Hebrews or Jews. This
claim has rested on their assumed selection by the Deity for a definite
purpose in the ordering and directing of human affairs; but no assumption
of supernatural origin can screen the documents of disputed authorship and
uncertain meaning on which that claim is based from the investigation
applied to all ancient records; nor can the materials elude dissection
because hitherto regarded as organic parts of revelation. The real
difficulties are in the structure of the language and in the scantiness of
the material as contrasted with the flexile and copious mythology of the
Aryan race. And the investigation has been in some degree checked by the
mistaken dicta of authorities such as M. Renan and the late Baron Bunsen;
the former contending that “the Semites never had a mythology,” and the
latter (although any statement of his carries far less weight) that “it is
the grand, momentous, and fortunate self-denial of Judaism to possess
none.”

But, independently of the refusal of the student of history to admit that
exceptional place has been accorded of direct Divine purpose to any
particular race, the discoveries of literatures much older than the
Hebrew, and in which legends akin to those in the earlier books of the Old
Testament are found, together with the proofs of historical connection
between the peoples having these common legends, have given the refutation
to the distinctive character of the Semitic race claimed by M. Renan. That
a people dwelling for centuries, as the Hebrews did, in a land which was
the common highway between the great nations of antiquity; a people
subject to vicissitudes bringing them, as the pipkin between iron pots,
into collision and subject relations to Egyptians, Persians, and other
powerful folk, should remain uninfluenced in their intellectual
speculations and religious beliefs, would indeed be a greater miracle than
that which makes their literature inspired in every word and vowel-point.
The remarkable collection of cuneiform inscriptions (so called from their
wedge-like shape: Latin, _cuneus_, a wedge) on the baked clay cylinders
and tablets of the vast libraries of Babylon and Nineveh, has brought out
one striking fact, namely, that the Semitic civilisation, venerable as
that is, was the product of, or at least, greatly influenced by, the
culture of a non-Semitic people called the Akkadians, from a word meaning
“highlanders.” These more ancient dwellers in the Euphrates valley and
uplands were not only non-Semitic but non-Aryan, and probably racially
connected with the complex group of peoples embracing the
Tatar-Mongolians, the distinguishing features of whose religion are
Shamanistic, with belief in magic in its manifold forms. “In Babylonia,
under the non-Semitic Akkadian rule, the dominant creed was the fetish
worship, with all its ritual of magic and witchcraft; and when the Semites
conquered the country, the old learning of the land became the property of
the priests and astrologers, and the Akkadian language the Latin of the
Empire.”[56]

It was during the memorable period of the Exile that the historical
records of the Jews underwent revision, and from that time dates the
incorporation into them of legends and traditions which, invested with a
purity and majesty distinctively Hebrew, were borrowed from the
Babylonians, although primarily Akkadian. They are here, as elsewhere, the
product of the childhood of the race, when it speculates and invents,
framing its theory of the beginnings, their when and how; when it prattles
of the Golden Age, which seems to lie behind, in the fond and not extinct
delusion that “the old is better;” when it frames its fairy tales, weird
or winsome, in explanation of the uncommon, the unknown, and the
bewildering.

The Babylonian origin of the early biblical stories is now generally
admitted, although the dogmas based upon certain of them still retard the
acceptance of this result of modern inquiry in some quarters. That
reluctance is suggestively illustrated in Dr. Wm. Smith’s _Dictionary of
the Bible_, where, turning to the heading “Deluge,” the reader is referred
to “Flood” and thence to “Noah!”

So much for the legendary; but the analysis of the more strictly mythical,
the names of culture-ancestors and heroes, sons of Anak and of God,
scattered over the Pentateuch, is not so easy a matter. The most important
work in this direction has been attempted by Dr. Goldziher,[57] but even
his scholarship has failed to convince sympathetic readers that Abraham
and Isaac are sun-myths, and that the twelve sons of Jacob are the
zodiacal signs! Under the Professor’s etymological solvent the personality
of the patriarchs disappears, and the charming idylls and pastorals of old
Eastern life become but phases of the sun and the weather. The Hebrew,
like the Aryan myth-maker, speaks of the relations of day and night, of
gray morning and sunrise, of red sunset and the darkness of night, as of
love and union, or strife and pursuit, or gloomy desire and coy evasion.
Abh-râm is the High or Heaven-Father (from _râm_, “to be high”) with his
numberless host of descendants. Yis-châk, commonly called Isaac, denotes
“he who laughs,” and so the Laughing one, whom the High Father intends to
slay, is the smiling day or the smiling sunset, which gets the worst of
the contest with the night sky, and disappears. Sarah signifies princess,
or the moon, the queen who rules over the great army glittering amidst the
darkness. The expulsion of Hagar (derived from a root _hajara_, meaning
“to fly,” and yielding the word hijrâ or “flight,” whence the Mohammadan
Hegira) is the Semitic variant of that inexhaustible theme of all
mythology, the battle of Day and Night; Hagar flying before the inconstant
sun and the jealous moon. And so on through the whole range of leading
characters in Hebrew history; Cain and Abel, in which Dr. Goldziher, to
whom they are the sun and dark sky, overlooks the more likely explanation
of the story as a quarrel between nomads and tillers of the soil;
Jephthah, in which the sun-god kills at mid-day the dawn, his own
offspring; Samson, or more correctly Shimshôn, from the Hebrew word for
sun, the incidents of whose life, as expounded by Professor Steinthal,[58]
are more clearly typical of the labours of the sun; Jonah and the fish, a
story long ago connected with the myth of Herakles and Hêsionê; “as on
occasion of the storm the dragon or serpent swallows the sun, so when he
sets he is swallowed by a mighty fish, waiting for him at the bottom of
the sea. Then when he appears again on the horizon, he is spat out on the
shore by the sea-monster.”[59]

These bare references must suffice to show that there is in Hebrew
literature a large body of material which must undergo the sifting and the
criticism already applied with success to Indo-European and non-Aryan
myth. This done, the Semitic race will contribute its share of evidence in
support of those conditions under which it has been the main purpose of
this book to show that myth has its birth and growth.


§ IX.

CONCLUSION.

The multitude of subjects traversed in the foregoing sections has
compelled presentment in so concise a form that any attempt to gather into
a few sentences the sum of things said would be as a digest of a digest,
and it is, therefore, better to briefly emphasise the conclusions to which
the gathered evidence points. It was remarked at the outset, when
insisting on the serious meaning which lies at the heart of myths, that
they have their origin in the endeavour of barbaric man to explain his
surroundings. The mass of fact brought together illustrates and confirms
this view, and has thereby tended to raise what was once looked upon as
fantastic, curious, and lawless, to the level of a subject demanding sober
treatment and examination on strictly scientific methods.

Archbishop Trench, in his _Study of Words_, quotes Emerson’s happy
characterisation of language as fossil poetry and fossil history: “Just as
in some fossil, curious and beautiful shapes of vegetable or animal life,
the graceful fern, or the finely-vertebrated lizard, such as have been
extinct for thousands of years, are permanently bound up with the stone,
so in words are beautiful thoughts and images, the imagination and the
feeling of past ages, of men long since in their graves, of men whose very
names have perished, preserved and made safe for ever.” In like manner we
may speak of myths as fossil ethics and fossil theology, but, with more
appositeness, as embryonic ethics and theology, since they contain
potentially all the philosophies and theologies “that man did ever find.”

And to the student of the history of humanity who rejoices in the sure
foundation on which, tested in manifold ways, the convictions of the
highest and noblest of the race rest, the value of myth is increased in
its being a natural outgrowth of the mind when, having advanced to the
point at which curiosity concerning the causes of surrounding things
arises, it frames its crude explanations. For not that which man claims to
have received as a message from the gods, as a revelation from heaven, but
that which he has learned by experience often painful and bitter, and
which succeeding generations have either verified or improved upon, or
disproved altogether, is, in the long run, of any worth. Through it alone,
as we follow the changes wrought in the process from guess to certainty,
can we determine what was the intellectual stage of man in his mental
infancy, and how far it finds correspondences in the intellectual stage of
existing barbaric races.

Thus, the study of myth is nothing less than the study of the mental and
spiritual history of mankind. It is a branch of that larger, vaster
science of evolution which so occupies our thoughts to-day, and with it
the philosopher and the theologian must reckon. The evidence which it
brings from the living and dead mythologies of every race is in accord
with that furnished by their more tangible relics, that the history of
mankind is a history of slow but sure advance from a lower to a higher; of
ascent, although with oft backslidings. It confirms a momentous canon of
modern science, that the laws of evolution in the spiritual world are as
determinable as they are in the physical. To this we, for the enrichment
of our life and helpful service of our kind, do well to give heed.
Wherever we now turn eye or ear the unity of things is manifest, and their
unbroken harmony heard. With the theory of evolution in our hands as the
master-key, the immense array of facts that seemed to lie unrelated and
discrete are seen to be interrelated and in necessary dependence--“a
mighty sum of things for ever speaking.” That undisturbed relation of
cause and effect which science has revealed and confirmed extends
backwards as well as reaches forwards; its continuity involves the
inclusion of man as a part of nature, and the study of his development as
one in which both the biologist and the mythologist engage towards a
common end.




II.

DREAMS: THEIR PLACE IN THE GROWTH OF BELIEFS IN THE SUPERNATURAL.


“The physical world is made up of atoms and ether, and there is no room
for ghosts.”

W. K. CLIFFORD.


“If ghos’es want me to believe in ’em, let ’em leave off skulking i’ the
dark and i’ lone places--let ’em come where there’s company and candles.”

GEORGE ELIOT.


DREAMS: THEIR PLACE IN THE GROWTH OF BELIEFS IN THE SUPERNATURAL.


§ I.

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SAVAGE AND CIVILISED MAN.

The evidence as to pre-historic man’s material furniture and surroundings,
which was first gathered from and restricted to ancient river valleys and
bone caverns of Great Britain, France, and Belgium, is no longer isolated.
It is supported by evidence which has been collected from every part of
the globe inhabited in past or present times, and its uniform character
has enabled us to determine what lies beyond an horizon which within the
last half century was bounded by the hazy line of myth and tradition. So
rigid seemed the limit defining man’s knowledge of his past that some
forty years ago even the Geological Society of London recorded with barest
reference the unearthing of relics witnessing to his presence in Britain
hundreds of thousands of years ago. The canon was closed, and no one
ventured to add to the sayings of the book. But the discoveries which had
disproved belief in the earth’s supremacy in the universe, and in its
creation in six days, led the way to researches into the history of the
life upon its surface, and especially of that which, in the language of
ancient writ, was “made in the image of God.” When the long-forbidding
line, imaginary as the equator and lacking its convenience, was crossed,
there was found the evidence of the conditions under which man emerged
from a state quite other than that which had formed the burden of legends
sacred with the hoariness of time. Those conditions, it is well-nigh
needless to remind the reader, accord with that theory which holds man to
be no specially-created being, started on this earth, fully equipped,
Minerva-like, with all ripeness of wisdom and loftiness of soul, but the
last and long result of an ever-ascending series of organisms ranging from
the lowest, shapeless, nerveless specks to _homo sapiens_, “the foremost
in the files of time.” Evolution is advance from the simple to the
complex. The most primitive forms reach maturity in a shorter time than
the higher forms, and fulfil their purpose quicker, and this doctrine
applies not only in relation to man and the inferior creatures, but as
between the several races of man himself. Herein the differences, which
are determined by size, still more by increase in complexity, of
brain-stuff, are greater than between the lowest man and the highest
animals--that is to say, the savage and civilised man are farther apart
than the savage and the anthropoid ape. The cranial capacity of the
modern Englishman surpasses that of the non-Aryan inhabitant of India by a
difference of sixty-eight cubic inches, while between this non-Aryan skull
and the skull of the gorilla the difference in capacity is but eleven
inches,[60] and if we were to take into account the differences in
structural complexity, as indicated by the creasing and furrowing of the
brain surface, the contrast would be still more striking.

The brains of the earliest known races, the men of the Ancient Stone Age,
ape-like savages who fought with woolly-haired elephants, cave-lions, and
cave-bears, amidst the forests and on the slopes of the valleys and hills
where London now stands, and who in the dawn of human intelligence,
applying means to ends, came off victorious, were doubtless much nearer to
the chimpanzee with his thirty-five cubic inches than to the Papuan with
his fifty-five cubic inches. Indeed, we need not travel beyond this age
or island; it suffices to compare the brain quality of the rustic,
thinking of “maistly nowt,” with that of the highest minds amongst us, as
evidence of the enormous diversity between wild and cultivated stocks of
mankind.

Unless we are so enchained to fond delusions as to place man in a kingdom
by himself, and deny in the sympathetic, moral, and intellectual faculties
in brutes the germs of those capacities which, existing in a pre-human
ancestry, have flowered in the noblest and wisest of our race, we may find
in such differences as are shown to occur between civilised and primitive
man further evidence of the enormous time since the latter appeared. For
unnumbered ages man--then physically hardly distinguishable from apes--may
have remained stationary. Certainly the relics from the Drift show no
advance: given no change in the conditions, the species do not vary, and
man, once adapted to his surroundings, changed only as these changed. But,
obscure as are the causes, there came a period when conditions arose
inducing some variation, no matter how slight, in brain development, which
was of more need than any variation in the rest of the body, and when an
impetus was given which, leaving the latter but slightly affected,
quickened the former, so that man passed from the highest animality to the
lowest humanity. Slowly, in the course of a struggle not yet ended, “the
ape and tiger” were subdued within him, and those social conditions
induced to which are due that progress which ever draws him nearer to the
angels.

The discussion of this in detail lies outside the limits of these pages.
Here, after briefly noting on what lines it must run, we are concerned
with man at that far later stage in his development when the physical and
material evidence respecting his bodily development gives place to the
psychical and immaterial evidence respecting his mental development.
Chipped flints, flakes, and scrapers of the Drift are indispensable
witnesses to his primitive state, but during the long ages that he was
making shift with them he remains within the boundaries of the zoological;
he is more geological than human. Gleams of the soul within that will one
day be responsive to grace of form and harmony of colour appear in the
rude portraits of mammoth, reindeer, urus, whale, and man himself,
scratched on ivory and horn. Indications of germinal ideas about an
after-life are present in the contents of tumuli with the skeletons in
defined positions, and with weapons presumably for the use of the departed
in the happy hunting-grounds. In these last we are nearing the historic
period, for a vast interval exists between the tomb-building races and the
men of the Reindeer Period, yet even then the ages are many before man had
so advanced as to bequeath the intangible relics of his thought,
disclosing what answer he had beat out for himself to the riddle of the
earth and the mysteries of life and death. Although the story of his
intellectual and spiritual development is a broken one, of the earlier
chapters of which we have no record, enough survives to induce and
strengthen the conviction that in this, as in aught else, there is no
real disconnection. In the shaping of the rudest pointed flint-tool and
weapon there are the germs of the highest mechanical art; in the
discordant war-whoop of the savage the latent strains of the
“Marseillaise,” as, quoting Tennyson, in the eggs of the nightingale
sleeps the music of the moon. If we cannot get so near to the elemental
forms of thought as we could wish, we must lay hold of the lowest extant,
and trace in these the connection to be sought between the barbaric and
civilised mind. We must have understanding of the mental condition of
races, still on low levels of culture, and if the result is to show that
many highly-elaborated beliefs among advanced peoples are but barbaric
philosophies “writ large,” the conception of an underlying unity between
all nations of men that do dwell, or have dwelt, on the face of the earth,
will receive additional proof.


§ II.

LIMITATIONS OF BARBARIC LANGUAGE.

Illustrations of the low intellectual stage of some extant races not quite
at the bottom of the scale, drawn from simple matters, will make clearer
how they will interpret matters of a more complex order, and interpret
them only in one way.

Of the beginning of thought we can know nothing. For numberless ages man
was marked out from the animals most nearly allied to him by that power
of more readily adapting means to ends which gave him mastery over nature.
Through that dim and dateless time he thought without knowing that he
thought. “His senses made him conversant only with things externally
existing and with his own body, and he transcended his senses only far
enough to draw concrete inferences respecting the action of these
things.”[61] He is human only when the thought reaches us through
articulate speech. Language, as a means of communication between him and
his fellows, denotes the existence of the social state, the play of the
social evolution which gives the impetus to ideas. Language is the outcome
of man’s social needs and nature; he speaks not so much because he thinks
and feels as because he must perforce tell his thoughts and feelings to
others. And by the richness or poverty of his speech we may assess the
richness or poverty of his ideas, since language cannot transcend the
thought of which it is the vehicle.

By what tones and gestures, by what signs and grimaces, the beginnings of
speech were made, we know not. Countless processions of races appeared and
vanished before language had reached a stage when the elements of which
words are built up could be separated, and the reason which governed the
choice of this and that sound or symbol discovered. Now and again, when a
correspondence is found between the roots of terms in use amongst the
higher races and the names given by lower races to the same thing, we get
nearer primitive thought, the correspondence being not always in sound or
spelling, which may be delusive, but in physical or sensible meaning. It
would be a wholesome corrective of theories concerning the origin of
languages to which many are yet wedded to show that terms not only for
things material and concrete, but also for things immaterial and abstract,
are of purely physical origin, _i.e._ have been chosen from their analogy
to something real. But the consideration of such matters lies outside the
purpose of this work.

Language proves the limited range of ideas among barbaric peoples in the
absence of their capacity to generalise. They have a word for every
familiar thing, sound, and colour, but no word for animal, plant, sound,
or colour as abstract terms. It is the concrete, the special shape and
feature and action of a thing, which strike the senses at the outset; to
strip it of these accidents, as we call them, and merge it in the general,
and realise its relation to what is common to the class to which it
belongs, is an effort of which the untutored mind is incapable. Many of
the northern non-Aryan tribes, as among the Mongols, have names for the
smallest rivulet, but no word for river; names for each finger, but no
word for finger. The Society Islanders have a separate name for the tails
of various animals, but no name for tail. The Mohicans have verbs for
every kind of cutting, but no verb “to cut.” The Australians and other
southern aborigines have no generic term for tree, neither have the
Malays, yet they have words for the several parts, the root, stem, twig,
etc. When the Tasmanians wished to express qualities of things, as hard,
soft, warm, long, round, they would say for hard, “like a stone”; for
tall, “long legs”; for round, “like the moon,” and so on. Certain
hill-tribes of India give names to sunshine, candle, and flames of fire,
but “light” is a high abstraction which they are unable to grasp. Some of
the Red Race languages have separate verbs for “I wish to eat meat,” or “I
wish to eat soup,” but no verb for “I wish.” Of course, the verb “to be,”
which, as Adam Smith remarked long ago, is the most abstract and
metaphysical of all words, and therefore of no early coinage, is absent
from a large number of barbaric languages. Abstract though it be, it is,
as Professor Whitney points out, made up of the relics of several verbs
which once had, like all elements and parts of speech, a distinct physical
meaning. As in “be” and “been” the idea of “growing” is contained, so in
“am,” “art,” “is,” and “are,” the idea of “sitting” (or, as some think, of
“breathing”) is embodied. As an example of its absence, the Abipones
cannot say “I am an Abipone,” only “I Abipone.” Turning to another class
of illustration, we have proof what a far cry it is from the savage to the
Senior Wrangler in the powerlessness of the former to count beyond his
fingers; indeed, he cannot always count as far as that, any number beyond
two bewildering him. One of the best stories to the point is given in Mr.
Galton’s _Tropical South Africa_.

“When the Dammaras wish to express four they take to their fingers, which
are to them as formidable instruments of calculation as a sliding rule is
to an English schoolboy. They puzzle very much after five, because no
spare hand remains to grasp and secure the fingers that are required for
units. Yet they seldom lose oxen; the way in which they discover the loss
of one is not by the number of the herd being diminished, but by the
absence of a face they know. When bartering is going on, each sheep must
be paid for separately. Thus, suppose two sticks of tobacco to be the rate
of exchange for one sheep, it would sorely puzzle a Dammara to take two
sheep and give him four sticks. I have done so, and seen a man put two of
the sticks apart, and take a sight over them at one of the sheep he was
about to sell. Having satisfied himself that that one was honestly paid
for, and finding to his surprise that exactly two sticks remained in hand
to settle the account for the other sheep, he would be afflicted with
doubts; the transaction seemed to come out too “pat” to be correct, and he
would refer back to the first couple of sticks; and then his mind got hazy
and confused, and wandered from one sheep to the other, and he broke off
the transaction until two sticks were put into his hand and one sheep
driven away, and then the other two sticks given him and the second sheep
driven away. Once while I watched a Dammara floundering hopelessly in a
calculation on one side of me, I observed Dinah, my spaniel, equally
embarrassed on the other. She was overlooking half a dozen of her new-born
puppies, which had been removed two or three times from her, and her
anxiety was excessive, as she tried to find out if they were all present,
or if any were still missing. She kept puzzling and running her eyes over
them, backwards and forwards, but could not satisfy herself. She evidently
had a vague notion of counting, but the figure was too large for her
brain. Taking the two as they stood, dog and Dammara, the comparison
reflected no great honour on the man.”

Dr. Rae says that if an Eskimo is asked the number of his children he is
generally puzzled. After counting some time on his fingers he will
probably consult his wife, and the two often differ, even though they may
not have more than four or five in family. Of the languages of the
Australian savages, who are the lowest extant, examined by Mr. Crawfurd,
thirty were found to have no number beyond four, all beyond this being
spoken of as “many,” whilst the Brazilian Indians got confused in trying
to reckon beyond three. The list of such cases might be largely extended,
and although exceptions occur where savages are found with a fairly wide
range of numbers, notably where barter prevails, the larger proportion of
uncivilised people are bewildered at any effort to count beyond three or
five. The fingers have, in most cases, determined the limits, for men
counted on these before they gave words to the numbers, the words being at
last borrowed from the fingers, as in our “five,” which is cognate with
the Greek “pente,” and the Persian “pendji” (said to be derived from the
word for “hand”), and “digits,” from Latin “digitus,” a finger. This
limited power of numeration thus shown to be possessed by the savage
justifies the statement that he is nearer to the ape than to the average
civilised man, nearer, as the extract from Mr. Galton shows, to the
spaniel than to the mathematician. What conception of the succession of
time, still less of it as a confluence of the eternities, can he have
whose feeble brain cannot grasp a to-morrow! And yet the difference is not
one of kind, but of degree, which separates the aborigines of Victoria or
Papua from the astronomer who is led by certain irregularities in the
motion of a planet to calculate the position of the disturbing cause, and
thereby to discover it nearly a thousand million miles beyond in the
planet Neptune.


§ III.

BARBARIC CONFUSION BETWEEN NAMES AND THINGS.

Races which have names for different kinds of oaks, but none for an oak,
still less for a tree, and who cannot count beyond their fingers, may be
expected to have hazy notions concerning the objective and subjective; or,
to put these in terms less technical, concerning that which belongs to the
object of thought, and that which is to be referred to the thinking
subject. Although primitive religion and philosophy are too nearly allied
to admit of sharp definitions, the former may be said, if the slang is
allowed, to be one of funk, and the latter one of fog. There are those
amongst us who say that the terrorism which lies at the base of the one
and the mist which is an element of the other, linger yet in extant belief
and metaphysics. What man cannot understand he fears; and in all primary
beliefs the powers around which seem to him so wayward are baleful, to be
appeased by sacrifice or foiled by sorcery. And the confusion which reigns
in his cosmos extends to his notion of what is in the mind and what is out
of it. He cannot distinguish between an illusion and a reality, between a
substance and its image or shadow; and it needs only some bodily ailment,
as indigestion through gorging, or delirium through starving, to give to
spectres of diseased or morbid origin, airy nothings, a substantive
existence, a local habitation, and a name.

The tangle between things and their symbols is well illustrated in the
barbaric notion that the name of a man is an integral part of himself, and
that to reveal it is to put the owner in the power of another. An Indian
asked Kane whether his wish to know his name arose from a desire to steal
it; the Araucanians would not allow their names to be told to strangers,
lest these should be used in sorcery. So with the Indians of British
Columbia; and among the Ojibways husbands and wives never told each
other’s names, the children being warned against repeating their own names
lest they stop growing. Dobrizhoffer says that the Abipones of Paraguay
had the like superstition. They would knock at his door at night, and when
asked who was there, no answer would come, through dread of uttering their
names. Mr. im Thurn tells us that, although the Indians of British Guiana
have an intricate system of names, it is “of little use, in that owners
have a very strong objection to telling or using them, apparently on the
ground that the name is part of the man, and that he who knows it has part
of the owner of that name in his power.” In Borneo the name of a sickly
child is changed, to deceive the evil spirits that have tormented it; the
Lapps change the baptismal name of a child for the same reason; and among
the Abipones, the Fuegians, the Lenguas of Brazil, the North-West Indians,
and other tribes at corresponding low levels, when any member died the
relatives would change their names to elude Death when he should come to
look for them, as well as give their children horrid names to frighten the
bad spirits away. All over the barbaric world we find a great horror of
naming the dead, lest the ghost appear. An aged Indian of Lake Michigan
explained why tales of the spirits were told only in winter, by saying
that when the deep snow is on the ground the voices of those repeating
their names are muffled; but that in summer the slightest mention of them
must be avoided, lest the spirits be offended. Among the Californian
tribes the name of the departed spoken inadvertently caused a shudder to
pass over all those present. Among the Iroquois the name of a dead man
could not be used again in the lifetime of his oldest surviving son
without the consent of the latter, and the Australians believe that a dead
man’s ghost creeps into the liver of the impious wretch who has dared to
utter his name. Dr. Lang tried to get the name of a relative who had been
killed from an Australian. “He told me who the lad’s father was, who was
his brother, what he was like, how he walked, how he held his tomahawk in
his left hand instead of his right, and who were his companions; but the
dreaded name never escaped his lips, and I believe no promises or threats
could have induced him to utter it.” Dorman gives a pathetic illustration
of this superstition in the Shawnee myth of Yellow Sky. “She was a
daughter of the tribe, and had dreams which told her she was created for
an unheard-of mission. There was a mystery about her being, and none could
comprehend the meaning of her evening songs. The paths leading to her
father’s lodge were more beaten than those to any other. On one condition
alone at last she consented to become a wife, namely, that he who wedded
her should never mention her name. If he did, she warned him that a sad
calamity would befall him, and he would for ever thereafter regret his
thoughtlessness. After a time Yellow Sky sickened and died, and her last
words were that her husband might never breathe her name. For five summers
he lived in solitude, but, alas, one day as he was by the grave of his
dead wife, an Indian asked him whose it was, and in forgetfulness he
uttered the forbidden name. He fell to the earth in great pain, and as
darkness settled round about him a change came over him. Next morning,
near the grave of Yellow Sky a large buck was quietly feeding. It was the
unhappy husband.”

The original meaning has dropped out of the current saying, “Talk of the
devil and you’ll see his horns,” but savage philosophy recovers it for us.
And the shrinking from naming persons is still more marked as we ascend
the scale of principalities and powers. In the South Sea Islands not only
are the names of chiefs tabooed, but also words and syllables resembling
those names in sound. The Tahitians have a custom called _Te pi_, which
consists in avoiding in daily language those words which form a part or
the whole of the names of the king and royal family, and in inventing new
terms in their place. The king’s name being _Tu fetu_, “star,” had to be
changed into _fetia_, and _tui_, “to strike,” became _tiai_. In New
Zealand knives were called _nekra_, because a chief’s name was _Maripi_,
or “knife.” It is, Professor Max Müller aptly remarks, as if with the
accession of Queen Victoria either the word _victory_ had been tabooed
altogether, or only part of it, as _tori_, so as to make it high treason
to speak of _Tories_ during her reign. The secret name of Pocahontas was
Matokas, which was concealed from the English through superstitious fear;
and in the mythical story of “Hiawatha” the same metonymic practice
occurs, his real name being Tarenyawagon. A survival of the dislike to
calling exalted temporal, and also spiritual, beings by their names,
probably lies at the root of the Jews’ unwillingness to use the name of
Yahweh (commonly and incorrectly spelt Jehovah[62]), and in the name
“Allah,” which is an epithet or title of the Mohammadan deity, and not the
“great name”; whilst the concealment by the Romans of the name of the
tutelary deity of their city was fostered by their practice, when
besieging any place, to invoke the treacherous aid of its protecting god
by offering him a high place in their Pantheon. And in the title of
Eumenidês, or the “gracious ones,” given to the Furies by the Greeks, may
be noted a survival of the verbal bribes by which the thing feared was
“squared.” For example, the Finnish hunters called the bear “the apple of
the forest,” “the beautiful honey-claw,” “the pride of the thicket”; the
Laplander speaks of it as “the old man with the fur coat”; in Annam the
natives call the tiger “grandfather,” or “lord”; and the Dyaks of Borneo
speak of the small-pox as “the chief,” or “jungle leaves.”

The confusion between ideas and objects which these examples illustrate is
shared by us, although in a remote degree. If the initials of any
well-known name are transposed, for example, let W. E. Gladstone be
printed E. W. Gladstone; or if some familiar name is altered, for example,
let John Bright be misprinted James Bright, it is curious to note how for
a moment the identity is obscured in one’s mind. Another personality,
indistinct and bewildering, rises before us, showing how we have come to
link together a man and his name even to the details of his initials. That
which we feel momentarily the uncivilised feels constantly. He cannot
think of himself, of his squaw, of his children, or of his
fellow-tribesmen, apart from names which are more significant to him than
ours are to us. With us the reason which governed selection is forgotten
or obscured, the physical features and conditions no longer correspond to
ancestral names; but with barbarous peoples those features and conditions
are more apparent. Besides which, children are often named by the
medicine-man, and the name is thus endowed with a charm which may roughly
be analogous to the halo round a name confirmed by baptism to one simply
recorded in the office of a Registrar of Births.


§ IV.

BARBARIC BELIEF IN VIRTUE IN INANIMATE THINGS.

The artificial divisions which man in his pride of birth made between the
several classes of phenomena in the inorganic world, and also between the
inorganic and the organic, are being swept away before the larger
knowledge and insight of our time. Indeed, it would seem that the surest
test we can apply to the worth of any kind of knowledge is whether it adds
to or takes from our growing conception of unity. If it does the former,
we cannot overthrow it; if it does the latter, then is it science “falsely
so called.”

That notable doctrine known as the correlation of physical forces, or the
convertibility into one another of heat, light, electricity, chemical
affinity, etc., each being a mode of manifestation of an unknown energy
which “lives through all life, extends through all extent,” has its
counterpart in the correlation of spiritual forces. Varied as are the
modes of expression of these, that variety is on the surface only. Deep
down lies the one source that feeds them, the one heart to whose existence
their pulsations witness. All primitive philosophies, all religions “that
man did ever find,” are but as the refractions of the same light dispersed
through different media; are the result of the speculations of the same
subject, allowances being made for local and non-essential differences
upon like objects. And, therefore, in treating of the nature and
limitations of man’s early thought concerning his surroundings, whether
these be the broad earth bathed in the sunshine or swathed in the
darkness, or the sounds that come from unseen agents, the sight of
spectral visitants of whom he cannot have touch, and out of which are
built up his theories of the invisible world, the reader may find
reference to the same conditions which were shown in former pages to give
birth and sustenance to primitive myth. The same fantastic conclusions,
drawn from rude analyses and associations, and from seeming connections of
cause and effect, the same bewildering entanglement between things which
we know can have nothing in common, meet us; and the same scientific
method by which we determine the necessary place of each in the advance of
man to truth through illusion is applied.

The illustrations of the vital connection which the savage assumes between
himself and his name show how easy is the passage from belief in life
inhering in everything to belief in it as capable of power for good or
evil. This can be shown by illustrations from more tangible things than
names. The savage who is afraid to utter these also shrinks from having
his likeness taken, in the feeling that some part of him is transferred,
and at the mercy of the sorcerer and enemy. The Malemutes of North America
refused to risk their lives before a photographic apparatus. They said
that those who had their likenesses had their spirit, and they would not
let these pass into the keeping of those who might use them as instruments
of torment. Catlin relates that he caused great commotion among the Sioux
by drawing one of their chiefs in profile. “Why was half his face left
out?” they asked; “Mahtocheega was never ashamed to look a white man in
the face.” The chief himself did not take offence, but Shouka the Dog
taunted him, saying: “The Englishman knows that you are but half a man; he
has painted but one-half of your face, and knows that the rest is good
for nothing.” This led to a quarrel, and in the end Mahtocheega was shot,
the fatal bullet tearing away just that part of the face which Catlin had
not drawn! He had to make his escape, and the matter was not settled till
both Shouka and his brother had been killed in revenge for Mahtocheega’s
death. The Yanktons accused Catlin of causing a scarcity of buffaloes by
putting a great many of them in his book, and refused to let him take
their portraits. So with the Araucanians, who ran away if any attempt was
made to sketch them. Among such races we find great care exercised lest
cuttings of hair, parings of nails, saliva, refuse of food, water in which
they had washed, etc., should fall into unfriendly or mistrusted hands.
The South Sea Island chiefs had servants following them with spittoons,
that the saliva might be buried in some hidden place. Among the
Polynesians any one who fell ill attributed it to some sorcerer, who had
got hold of refuse from the sick and was burning it, and the quiet of the
night was often broken by the blowing of shell-trumpets, as signals for
the sorcerer to stop until the gifts on their way to appease him could
arrive. The idea is common both to Eskimo and Indian that so long as a
fragment of a body remains unburnt, the being, man or beast, may, by
magic, be revived from it. As with the name or the portrait, whoever
possessed a part of the material substance possessed a part of the
spiritual, and in this world-wide belief in a sympathetic connection
between things living and not living lies the whole philosophy of
sorcery, of charms, amulets, spells, and the general doctrine of luck
surviving through the successive stages of culture to this day. And he who
would prevent anything from his person getting into hostile hands,
naturally sought after things in which coveted qualities were believed to
dwell, and avoided those of a reverse nature. So we find tiger’s flesh
eaten to give courage, and the eyes of owls swallowed to give good sight
in the dark. The Kaffirs prepare a powder made of the dried flesh of
various wild beasts, the leopard, tiger, elephant, snake, etc., so as to
absorb the several virtues of these creatures. The Tyrolese hunter wears
his tuft of eagle’s down to gain long sight and daring, and the Red Indian
strings bears claws round his neck to get Bruin’s savage courage. The
customs of scalping and, in some measure, of cannibalism, may be referred
to the same notion, for the Red man will risk his life to prevent a
tribesman’s scalp being captured by the foe, and the New Zealander will
swallow the eyes of his slain enemy to improve his sight. In Greenland “a
slain man is said to have power to avenge himself upon the murderer by
_rushing into him_, which can only be prevented by eating a piece of his
liver.”[63] When a whaler died the Eskimos distributed portions of his
dried body among his friends, and rubbed the points of their lances with
them, it being held that a weapon thus charmed would pierce a vital part
in a whale, where another would fail. Sometimes the body was laid in a
cave, and, before starting for the chase, the whalers would assemble, and,
carrying it to a stream, plunge it in, and then drink the water. When the
heroic Jesuit Brébeuf was tortured by the Iroquois, they were so
astonished at his endurance that they laid open his breast and came in a
crowd to drink the blood of so valiant a foe, thinking to imbibe with it
some portion of his courage, while a chief tore out his heart and devoured
it.

Cannibalism, it may be remarked, _en passant_, is also found to have a
religious significance, on the supposition, which has unsuspected survival
among advanced races, that eating the body and drinking the blood
communicates the spirit of the victim to the consumer. It is not always
the most savage races who practise it; for example, the Australians,
despite the scarcity of large animals for food supply, rarely ate the
flesh of man, whilst the New Zealanders, who rank far above them, and had
not the like excuse, were systematic feeders on human flesh.

As examples of a reverse kind, but witnessing to the play of like beliefs
in qualities passing from brutes and lifeless things, we find some races
avoiding oil, lest the game slip through their fingers, abstaining from
the flesh of deer, lest it engenders timidity, and from that of pigs and
of tortoises lest the eater has very small eyes. Dr. Tylor gives an
apposite illustration of a kindred superstition in the Hessian lad who
thinks that he may escape the conscription by carrying a baby-girl’s cap
in his pocket as a symbolical way of repudiating manhood. So the thief of
our London slums hopes to evade the police by carrying a piece of coal or
slate in his pocket for luck. Among ourselves there was an old medical
saw, “Hare-flesh engendereth melancholy bloude,” and in Swift’s _Polite
Conversation_ we have this reason assigned by Lady Answerall when asked to
eat it; whilst faith is not yet extinct in the “Doctrine of Signatures,”
or the notion that the appearance of a plant indicates the disease for
which it is a remedy, as the “eye-bright,” the black purple spot on the
corolla of which was said to show that it was good for weak eyes. In
referring to the mandrake superstition (a plant whose roots are said to
rudely resemble the human form) as illustration of the “recognised
principles in magic that things like each other, however superficially,
affect each other in a mystic way and possess identical properties,” Mr.
Andrew Lang quotes a Melanesian belief that a stone in the shape of a pig,
of a bread-fruit, of a yam, was a most valuable find, because it made pigs
prolific and fertilised bread-fruit trees and yam-plots.[64]

Brand remarks[65] that the custom of giving infants coral to help in
cutting the teeth is said to be a survival of an old belief in it as an
amulet; and in English, Sicilian, and West Indian folk-lore, we find the
belief that it changes colour in sympathy with the pale or healthy look of
the wearer. An old Latin author says,[66] “It putteth of lightenynge,
whirle-wynde, tempeste, and storms fro shyppes and houses that it is in.”

We are each of us hundreds of thousands of years old, and although our
customs and beliefs have a far less venerable antiquity, their sources lie
not less in primitive thought. Like the survival of the ancient Roman
workman’s “casula” or “little house” or “shelter” in the chasuble of the
priest; like the use of stone knives in circumcision long after the
discovery of metals; the general tends to become special; the common, its
primitive need or service forgotten, to become sacred. Sometimes the early
idea abides; the Crees, who carry about the bones of the dead carefully
wrapped up as a fetish; the Caribs, who think such relics can answer
questions; the Xomanes, who drink the powdered bones in water, that they
may receive the spirit; the Algonquins, whose god Manobozho turned bits of
his own flesh or his wife’s into raccoons for food; the Iroquois cited
above; represent the barbarous ancestry of higher races, whether of the
Bacchanalians described by Arnobius,[67] who thought that the fulness of
the divine majesty was imparted to them when they tore and ate the
struggling rams with mouths dripping with gore, or of the faithful who
receive nutriment through the symbols of the Cross. And the prayers of
savage and civilised have this in common, that some advantage is thereby
sought by the utterer; their sacrifices are alike the giving up of one’s
goods or one’s self to a deity who may be appeased or bribed thereby;
their fastings are cultivated as inducing the abnormal states in which
their old men dream dreams and their young men see visions of spirits
appearing as angels ascending and descending between earth and the abode
of the blest. Baptisms are the ancient lustrations, which water, as the
cleansing element, suggested; and the eastward position, over which
priests and ecclesiastics have fought, is the undoubted relic of worship
of the rising sun.

In short, there is no rite or ceremony yet practised and revered amongst
us which is not the lineal descendant of barbaric thought and usage,
expressing a need which, were men less the slaves of custom and indolence,
would long since have found loftier form than in genuflexion before shrine
and reliquary. By an exercise of imagination not possible but for these
being a felicitous “gesture language” of the cries of human souls, a mass
of heathen and pagan rites have been transformed into those of the
Christian faith. That they have come to be mistaken for the ideas
symbolised, that with the loftiest spiritual teaching there should remain
commingled belief in miraculous power in fragments (mostly spurious) of
dead men and their clothes; only shows the persistency of that notion of a
vital connection between the lifeless and the living which this section
has sought to illustrate.


§ V.

BARBARIC BELIEF IN THE REALITY OF DREAMS.

The confusion in the barbaric mind between the objective and the
subjective, and between the name and the person or thing, which has been
illustrated in the foregoing pages, will enable us to see more clearly how
the like confusion must enter into the interpretation of such occult and
compound phenomena as dreams, and all their kind.

They supply the conditions for exciting and sustaining that feeling of
mystery which attends man’s endeavour to get at the meaning of his
surroundings. The phantasies which have defiled through the brain in
coherent order, or danced in mazy whirl about its sinuous passages when
complete sleep was lacking, leave their footprints on the memory, and they
are strong of head and heart, true pepticians, like the countryman cited
by Carlyle, who, “for his part, had no system,” whose composure on awaking
is not affected by the harmonious or discordant, the pleasant or
disagreeable, illusions which have made up their dreams. In the felicitous
words of Lucretius, “When sleep has chained down our limbs in sweet
slumber, and the whole body is sunk in profound repose, yet then we seem
to ourselves to be awake and to be moving our limbs, and amid the thick
darkness of night we think we see the sun and the daylight; and though in
a confined room, we seem to be passing to new climates, seas, rivers,
mountains, and to be crossing plains on foot, and to hear voices, though
the austere silence of night prevails all round, and to be uttering
speech, though quite silent. Many are the other things of this marvellous
sort we see, which all seek to shake, as it were, the credit of the
senses: quite in vain, since the greatest part of these cases cheat us on
account of the mental suppositions which we add of ourselves, taking those
things as seen which have not been seen by the senses. For nothing is
harder than to separate manifest facts from doubtful, which the mind
without hesitation adds on of itself.”[68]

While for us dreams fill an empty moment in the telling, albeit now and
again nurturing such remains of superstition as cling to the majority of
people, they are to the untrained intelligence, unable to distinguish fact
from fiction, or to follow any sequence of ideas, as solid as the
experiences of waking moments. As a Zulu, well expressing the limits of
savage thought, said to Bishop Callaway, “Our knowledge does not urge us
to search out the roots of it, we do not try to see them, if any one
thinks ever so little, he soon gives it up, and passes on to what he sees
with his eyes; and he does not understand the real state of even what he
sees.” Nor does his language clear the confusion within when he tells what
he has seen and heard and felt, where he has been and what he has done,
for the speech cannot transcend the thought, and therefore can represent
neither to himself nor to his hearers the difference between the illusions
of the night and the realities of the day. The dead relatives and friends
who appear in dreams and live their old life, with whom he joins in the
battle, the chase, and the feast, the foes with whom he struggles, the
wild beasts from whom he flees, or in whose clutches he feels himself, and
with shrieks awakens his squaw, the long distances he travels to sunnier
climes lit by a light that never was on land or sea, are all real, and no
“baseless fabric of a vision.” That now and again he should have walked in
his sleep would confirm the seeming reality; still more so would the
intensified form of dreaming called “nightmare,”[69] when hideous spectres
sit upon the breast, stopping breath and paralysing motion, and to which
is largely due the creation of the vast army of nocturnal demons that fill
the folk-lore of the world, and that, under infinite variety of repellent
form, have had place in the hierarchy of religions.

Dreams are in the main referred by the savage either to the entrance into
him of some outside spirit, as among the Fijians, who believe that the
spirit of a living man will leave the body to trouble sleeping folk, or to
the real doings of himself.

When the Greenlander dreams of hunting, or fishing, or courting, he
believes that the soul quits the body; the Dyaks of Borneo think that
during sleep the soul sometimes remains in the body or travels far away,
being endowed, whether present or absent, with conditions which in waking
moments are lacking. Wherever we find a low state of mental development
the like belief exists. In Mr. im Thurn’s elaborate work on the _Indians
of Guiana_ we have corroborative evidence, the more valuable because of
its freshness. He tells us that the dreams which come to the Indian are to
him as real as any of the events of his waking life. To him dream-acts
and waking-acts differ only in one respect--namely, that the former are
done only by the spirit, the latter are done by the spirit in its body.
Seeing other men asleep, and afterwards hearing from them the things which
they suppose themselves to have done when asleep, the Indian has no
difficulty in reconciling that which he hears with the fact that the
bodies of the sleepers were in his sight and motionless throughout the
time of supposed action, because he never questions that the spirits,
leaving the sleepers, played their part in dream-adventures. Mr. im Thurn
illustrates the complete belief of the Indian in the unbroken continuity
of his dream-life and waking-life by incidents which came under his own
notice, and which are quoted as serving the present argument better than
any theorising.

    One morning when it was important to me to get away from a camp on the
    Essequibo River, at which I had been detained for some days by the
    illness of some of my Indian companions, I found that one of the
    invalids, a young Macusi, though better in health, was so enraged
    against me that he refused to stir, for he declared that, with great
    want of consideration for his weak health, I had taken him out during
    the night and had made him haul the canoe up a series of difficult
    cataracts. Nothing could persuade him that this was but a dream, and
    it was some time before he was so far pacified as to throw himself
    sulkily into the bottom of the canoe. At that time we were all
    suffering from a great scarcity of food, and, hunger having its usual
    effect in producing vivid dreams, similar events frequently occurred.
    More than once the men declared in the morning that some absent man,
    whom they named, had come during the night, and had beaten, or
    otherwise maltreated them; and they insisted on much rubbing of the
    bruised parts of their bodies. Another instance was amusing. In the
    middle of one night I was awakened by an Arawak named Sam, the captain
    or head-man of the Indians who were with me, only to be told the
    bewildering words, “George speak me very bad, boss; you cut his bits!”
    It was some time before I could collect my senses sufficiently to
    remember that “bits,” or fourpenny-pieces, are the units in which,
    among Creoles and semi-civilised Indians, calculation of money, and
    consequently of wages, is made; that to cut bits means to reduce the
    number of bits or wages given; and to understand that Captain Sam,
    having dreamed that his subordinate George had spoken insolently to
    him, the former, with a fine sense of the dignity of his office, now
    insisted that the culprit should be punished in real life. One more
    incident, of which the same Sam was the hero, may be told for the sake
    of the humour, though it did not happen within my personal experience,
    but was told me by a friend. This friend, in whose employ Sam was at
    the time, told his man, as they sat round the fire one night, of the
    Zulu or some other African war which was then in progress, and in so
    doing inadvertently made frequent use of the expression, “to punish
    the niggers.” That night, after all in camp had been asleep for some
    time, they were raised by loud cries for help. Sam, who was one of the
    most powerful Indians I ever saw, was “punishing a nigger” who
    happened to be one of the party; with one hand he had firmly grasped
    the back of the breeches-band of the black man, and had twisted this
    round so tightly that the poor wretch was almost cut in two. Sam
    sturdily maintained that he had received orders from his master for
    this outrageous conduct, and on inquiry it turned out that he had
    dreamed this.[70]

Taking an illustration from nearer home, although from a more remote time,
we have in the Scandinavian _Vatnsdæla Saga_ a curious account of three
Finns who were shut up in a hut for three nights, and ordered by
Ingimund, a Norwegian chief, to visit Iceland, and inform him of the line
of the country where he was to settle. Their bodies became rigid, and they
sent their souls on their errand, and, on their awaking at the end of
three days, gave an accurate account of the Vatnsdæl, in which Ingimund
ultimately dwelt. No wonder that in mediæval times, when witches swept the
air and harried the cattle, swooning and other forms of insensibility were
adduced in support of the theory of soul-absence, or that we find among
savages--as the Tajals of the Luzon islands--objections to waking a
sleeper lest the soul happens to be out of the body. As a corollary to
this belief in soul-absence, fear arises lest it be prolonged to the peril
of the owner, and hence a rough and ready theory of the cause of disease
is framed, for savages rarely die in their beds.


§ VI.

BARBARIC THEORY OF DISEASE.

That disease is a derangement of functions interrupting their natural
action, and carrying attendant pain as its indication, could not enter the
head of the uncivilised: and, indeed, among ourselves a cold or a fever is
commonly thought of as an entity in the body which has stolen in, and,
having been caught, must be somehow expelled. With the universal primitive
belief in spiritual agencies everywhere inhaled with the breath or
swallowed with the food or drink, all diseases were regarded as their
work, whether, as remarked above, through absence of the rightful spirit
or subtle entrance of some hostile one. If these be the causes to which
sicknesses are due, obviously the only cure is to get rid of them, and
hence the sorcerer and the medicine-man find their services in request in
casting out the demon by force, or enticing him by cajolery, or in
bringing back the truant soul.

To the savage mind no other explanation of illness is possible than that
it is due to the exit of one’s own spirit or to the intrusion of a
stronger one, whether of revengeful man or animal. An old Dakota, whose
son had sore eyes, said that nearly thirty years before, when the latter
was a boy, he fastened a pin to a stick and speared a minnow with it, and
it was strange that after so long a time the fish should come to seek
revenge. When an Indian is attacked by any wild beast he believes that the
avenging Kenaima has transferred his spirit to the animal which seizes
him, and if he has even a toothache, of which more presently, then the
Kenaima has insinuated himself in the shape of a worm. The tribal chief
among the Brazilian natives acts as doctor, and when he visits the sick he
asks what animal the patient has offended, and if no cure is effected, the
convenient explanation is at hand that the right animal has not been
found. At the death of Iron Arms, a noted North American Indian warrior,
it was said that he died because the doctor made a mistake, thinking that
a prairie-dog had entered him, when it was a mud-hen. In the weird
mythology of the Finns the third daughter of the ruler of Tuonela, the
underworld, sits on a rock rising from hell-river, beneath which the
spirits of all diseases are shut up. As she whirls the rock round like a
millstone the spirits escape and go on their torturing errand to mortals.
The more abnormal and striking phases of disease manifest when a man is
writhing under intense agony, as if torn and twisted by some fiendish
living thing, or when in delirium he raves and starts, or when thrown down
in epilepsy he struggles convulsively, or when he shivers in an ague, or
when in more violent forms of madness he seems endowed with superhuman
strength; the various symptoms attending hysteria; each and all support
that theory of spirit-influence which survives among advanced races in
referring disease to supernatural causes. For the ancient theories of a
divine government under which disease is the expression of the anger of
the gods, and medicine the token of their healing mercy, and the current
notions that any epidemic or pestilence is a visitation of God, are
identical in character, however improved in feature, with the barbaric
belief illustrated above; and in the ages when belief in the devil as one
walking to and fro upon the earth was rampant, he especially was regarded
as bringer of both bane and antidote. “He may,” says an old writer,
“inflict diseases, which is an effect he may occasion _applicando activa
passivis_ (by applying actives to passives), and by the same means he may
likewise cure ... and not only may he cure diseases laid on by himself, as
Wierus observes, but even natural diseases, since he knows the natural
causes and the origin of even those better than the physicians can, who
are not present when diseases are contracted, and who, _being younger than
he_, must have less experience.”[71] In Lancashire folk-lore “casting out
the ague” was but another name for “casting out the devil”; in the Arabic
language the words for epilepsy and possession by demons are the same; and
in such phrases as a man being “beside himself,” “transported,” “out of
his mind,” or in the converse, as when it is said in the parable of the
prodigal son, “he came to himself”; in the words “ecstasy,” which means a
displacement or removal of the soul, and “catalepsy,” a seizing of the
body by some external power, we have language preserving the primitive
ideas of an intruding or departing spirit. Such minor actions as gaping
and sneezing confirm the belief. The philosophy of the latter, as Mr. Gill
remarks in his _Myths and Songs of the South Pacific_, is that the spirit
having gone travelling about, its return to the body is naturally attended
with some difficulty and excitement, occasioning a tingling and enlivening
sensation all over the body. And the like explanation lies at the root of
the mass of customs attendant on sneezing, and of the superstitions
generated by it, which extend through the world.

Williams tells us that among the Fijians, when any one faints or dies,
their spirit, it is said, may sometimes be brought back by calling after
it, and occasionally the ludicrous scene is witnessed of a stout man lying
at full length and bawling out lustily for the return of his soul. So in
China, when a child is lying dangerously ill, its mother will go outside
into the garden and call its name, in the hope of bringing back the
wandering spirit. But for all the ills that flesh is heir to, from
hiccupping to madness, from toothache to broken limbs, the patient seldom
dares to doctor himself; neither the etiquette of the ordained
medicine-man nor the orthodox therapeutics favour that show of
independence. The methods adopted by the faculty vary in detail, but they
are ruled by a single assumption. When a Chinaman is dying, and the soul
is believed to be already out of the body, a relative holds up his coat on
a bamboo stick, and a Taoist priest seeks by incantations to bring back
the truant soul so that it may re-enter the sick man. Among the Six
Nations the Indians sought to discover the intruder by gathering a
quantity of ashes and scattering them in the cabin where the sick person
was lying. A similar recipe for tracking demons is given in the _Talmud_;
but, as more nearly bearing on the Indian practice, a Polish custom
mentioned by Grimm[72] may be quoted. When the white folk torment a sick
man a friend walks round him carrying a sieveful of ashes on his back, and
lets the ashes run out till the floor round the bed is covered with them.
The next morning all the lines in the ashes are counted, and the result
told to a wise woman, who prescribes accordingly.

A favourite mode of treatment is blowing upon or sucking the diseased
organ, and deception is no infrequent resort when the sorcerer secretes
thorns or fishbones, beetles or worms, in his mouth, and then pretends
that he has extracted them. Cranz says that the Eskimo old women appear to
suck from a swollen leg scraps of leather or a parcel of hair which they
have previously crammed into their mouths, and in Australia the same dodge
is practised, when the sorcerer makes believe that he has drawn out a
piece of bone from the affected part. That toothache is due to a worm is a
belief which exists throughout Europe and Asia, and from the Orkneys to
New Zealand. Shakspere refers to it in _Much Ado about Nothing_, Act III.
Scene ii.--

  _Don Pedro._ What! sigh for the toothache?

  _Leonata._ Where is but a humour or a worm;

and instances are current of this superstition being acted upon in rural
districts, whilst in China the itinerant dentist conceals a worm in the
stick which he applies to the aching tooth, and on the stick being gently
tapped, the worm wriggles out to the satisfaction of the sufferer. But
among barbaric races the treatment of disease is ordinarily the reverse of
soothing. Here and there the virtues of some plant have been discovered by
accident, and, whilst exalted into a deity in its native home, it has
become, like cinchona, a priceless boon to the fever-stricken all over the
world; but, speaking broadly, the medicine-man is no Melampus, winning
the secret of their healing balm from herb and tree. Nor has he much faith
in magic or charm compared to his faith in noise, in incantations, with
their accompanying hideous grimaces and gestures, and their deafening
yells with clang of instrument to drown the sufferer’s groans and chase
away the demon. Not unfrequently, when the patient is kept without food so
as to starve out the indwelling enemy, or when the body is pommelled and
squeezed to force him out, the remedy helps the disease! An illustration
or two from a great mass at command must suffice. Among the Mapuches the
sorcerer adopts the canonical howls and grimaces. Making himself as
horrible-looking as he can, he begins beating a drum and working himself
into a frenzy until he falls to the ground with his breast working
convulsively. As soon as he falls, a number of young men outside the hut,
who are there to help him in frightening the disease-bringing spirit out
of the patient, add their defiant yells, and dash at full speed, with
lighted torches, against the hut. If this does not succeed, and the
patient dies, the result is attributed to witchcraft. When a Pawnee chief
had some ribs and an arm broken, the medicine-men danced round him, and
raised their voices from murmurous chants to howls, accompanying the music
by blows upon the wounded man’s breast to banish the bad spirit. In olden
time this rough-and-tumble business of blows, to which immersion was
added, was applied to lunatics in these islands. And, in fact, until some
local paper narrates a current superstition, we seldom awaken to the fact
how widely the theological explanation of diseases and the empirical
choice of remedies still obtains, each being survivals of barbaric theory
and practice.

The savage who has more faith, as a curative, in plants that grow on
burial-places, and the Christian, who ascribed special healing power to
turf and dew from a saint’s grave,[73] differ no whit in kind; and so
ingrained was the medicinal belief in virtue inhering in fragments of the
dead, that not even the satire of “Reynard the Fox,” telling how the wolf
was cured of his earache, and the hare of his fever, the moment that they
lay down on the grave of the martyred hen, could give quietus to the
notion that grated skulls and sacramental shillings were specifics for the
healing of the faithful.

This reference to like practices reminds us how belief in the action of
invisible agencies has passed into the practice of confession among
advanced races outside Christendom, as in Mexico and Peru. The Roman
Catholic priests were not less astonished at finding this in vogue on
their arrival in South America than the good Father Huc when, on reaching
Tibet, he found shaven monks wearing rosaries, worshipping relics, using
holy water, and a grand Lama decked in mitre, cope, and cross.[74] But, as
the Italian proverb has it, the world is one country, and “we have all
one human heart,” so that the confessional has the like explanation in
east as in west. If the disease be the work of an offended deity or of an
avenging spirit, let the wrong-doer admit his fault, and trust to him who
is credited with influence with the unseen to exorcise the intruder.


§ VII.

BARBARIC THEORY OF A SECOND SELF OR SOUL.

In thus far illustrating the confusion inherent in the barbaric mind
between what is and what is not external to itself, the explanation given
of matters still dividing philosophers into opposite camps has been hardly
indicated. The uniformity of this confusion among the lower intelligence
in every zone and age might surprise us, and we should be in bondage to
the theory which explains it by assumption of primal intuitions of the
race, were we not rejoicing in the freedom of the truth of the doctrine of
the descent, or ascent, of man from an ape-like ancestry, and the
resulting slow development of his psychical faculties, involving his
accounting for motion in things around by the like personal life and will
of which he is conscious in himself, and for his regarding the world of
great and small alike as the home and haunt of spirits.

For the assumption underlying the savage explanation of such things as
dreams and diseases involves a larger assumption--namely, that the spirit
which acts thus arbitrarily, playing this game of hide-and-seek, now, as
it were, caught up into Paradise, and now dodging its owner and worrying
its enemy on earth--is, to quote Mr. Spencer’s appropriate term, a man’s
_other self_. It is, at least, what the scientists call a working
hypothesis; it is the only possible explanation which the uncultivated
mind can give of what it has not the power to see is a subjective
phenomenon. Odd and out-of-the-way events have happened to the dreamer; he
has been to strange places and seen strange doings, but waking up, he
knows that he is in the same wigwam where he laid down to sleep, and can
be convinced by his squaw that he has not moved therefrom all night.
Therefore it is the other self, this phantom-soul, which has been away for
a time, seeing and taking part in things both new and old. We civilised
folk, as Dr. Wendell Holmes remarks, not rarely find our personality
doubled in our dreams, and do battle with ourselves, unconscious that we
are our own antagonists. Dr. Johnson dreamed that he had a contest with an
opponent and got the worst of it; of course, he found the argument for
both! Tartini heard the devil play a wonderful sonata, and lay entranced
by the arch-fiend’s execution. On waking he seized his violin, and
although he could not reproduce the actual succession of notes, he
recovered sufficient impressions to compose his celebrated “Devil’s
Sonata.” Obviously the devil was no other than Tartini.

Thus the philosopher, to whom dreaming merely indicates a certain amount
of uncontrolled mental activity, may satisfy himself; not thus can the
savage, who cannot even think that he thinks, and to whom the phenomena of
shadows, reflection, and echoes bring confirming evidence of the existence
of his mysterious double. What else than a veritable entity can his shadow
be to him? Its intangibility feeds his awe and wonder, and increases his
bewilderment; its actions, ever corresponding with his own, make it, even
more than its outline, a part of himself, the loss of which may be
serious. Only when the light is withdrawn or intercepted does the shadow
cease to accompany, precede, or follow him, and to lengthen, shorten, or
distort itself; whilst not he alone, but all things above and around, have
this phantom attendant. The Choctaws believed that each man has an outside
shadow, _shilombish_, and an inside shadow, _shilup_, both of which
survive his decease. Among the Fijians a man’s shadow is called the dark
spirit, which goes to the unseen world, while the other spirit, which is
his likeness reflected in water or a mirror, stays near the place where he
dies. The Basutos are careful, when walking by a river, not to let their
shadow fall on the water, lest a crocodile seize it, and harm the owner.
Among the Algonquin Indians sickness is accounted for by the patient’s
shadow being unsettled or detached from the body; the Zulus say that a
corpse cannot cast a shadow, and in the barbaric belief that its loss is
baleful, we have the germ of the mediæval legends of shadowless men and of
tales of which Chamisso’s story of Peter Schlemihl is a type. The New
England tribes called the soul _chemung_, the shadow, and in the Quiche
and Eskimo languages, as also in the several dialects of Costa Rica, the
same word expresses both ideas; while civilised speech indicates community
of thought in the _skia_ of the Greeks, the _manes_ or _umbra_ of the
Romans, and the _shade_ of our own tongue. Still more complete in the
mimicry is the reflection of the body in water or mirror, the image
repeating every gesture and adopting every colour, whilst in the echoes
which forest and hillside fling back, the savage hears confirmation of his
belief in the other self, as well as in the nearness of the spirits of the
dead. The Sonora Indians say that departed souls dwell among the caves and
nooks of the cliffs, and that the echoes are their voices, and in South
Pacific myth echo is the first and parent fairy, to whom at Marquesas
divine honours are still paid as the giver of food, and as she who “speaks
to the worshippers out of the rocks.” In Greek myth she is punished by
Juno for diverting her attention whilst Jupiter flirts with the nymphs,
and at last, pining in grief at her unrequited love for Narcissus, there
remains nothing but her voice.

But what, in primitive conception, is the more specific nature of the
other self, and how does it make the passage from within to without, and
_vice versâ_? Very early in man’s history he must have wondered at the
difference between a waking and a sleeping person, a living and a dead
one, and sought wherein this consisted. There lay the body in the repose,
more or less broken, of sleep, or in the undisturbed repose of the
unawakening sleep; in the latter case, with nothing tangible or visible
gone, but that which was once “quick” and warm, which had spoken, moved,
smiled, or frowned but a little while before, and which still came in
dream or vision, was now cold and still.

It should here be remarked, in passing, that many savage races do not
believe in death as a natural event, but regard it as differing from sleep
only in the length of time that the spirit is absent from the body. No
matter what any one’s age may be, if his death is not caused by wounds, it
is attributed to magic, and the search for the sorcerer becomes a family
duty, like the vendetta for other injuries. The widespread myths which
account for death have as their underlying idea the infraction of some law
or custom, for which the offender pays the extreme penalty. And that
personification of it which pervades barbaric thought, whilst undergoing
many changes of form, yet retains its hold in popular conception as well
as in poetry. Pictured as the messenger of Deity, as the awful angel who
sought the rebellious and impious, or who, in mission of tenderness, bore
the soul to its home in the bosom of the Eternal, it was transformed and
degraded by the grotesque fancy of a later time into a grim and dancing
skeleton whetting his sickle for ingathering of the young and fair to
their doom, or into the grinning skull and crossbones of Christian
headstones. So when the maiden Proserpine is plucking the spring flowers,
“crocuses and roses and fair violets,” in the Elysian fields, Hades,
regent of hell, regardless of her cries, carries her off to his invisible
realm.

But to resume. Whilst shadows, reflections, and echoes, one and all,
seemed to satisfy the uncivilised mind as to the existence of the other
self, they gave no key to its nature, to what it is like. Obviously the
difference between death and life lay in some unsubstantial or
semi-substantial thing. Perhaps, thought some races, it lies in the blood,
with the unchecked outflow of which death ensues, and the idea of this
connection has not been confined to barbaric peoples. Perhaps, thought
other races, it lies in the heart, which, say the Basutos, has gone out of
any one dead, but has returned when the sick have recovered. Among the
Greeks some philosophers held that it was fire, which was extinct when the
fuel of life was burnt out, or water, which would evaporate away. But, as
language shows, it is with the _breath_ that the other self of the savage
and the vital principle of the philosopher has been most widely
identified. For it is the cessation of breathing which would in the
long-run be noted as the unfailing accompaniment of death; and the
condensing vapour, as it was exhaled, would confirm the existing theories
of a shadowy and gaseous-like soul. In this, as the illustrations to be
adduced from various languages will evidence, the continuity of idea which
travels along the whole line of barbaric and learned speculation is
unbroken.


§ VIII.

BARBARIC PHILOSOPHY IN “PUNCHKIN” AND ALLIED STORIES.

As bearing upon the barbaric belief in the soul leaving the body at
pleasure, there is a remarkable group of stories, the central idea of
which is the dwelling apart of the soul or heart, as the seat of life, in
some secret place, in an egg, or a necklace, or a flower, the good or evil
fortunes of the soul involving those of the body. To this group the name
of “Punchkin,” the title of one of the older specimens, may conveniently
be given. In Miss Frere’s _Old Deccan Days_ it takes the following form.

A Rajah has seven daughters, and his wife dying when they were quite
children, he marries the widow of his prime minister. Her cruelty to his
children made them run off to a jungle, where seven neighbouring princes,
who were out hunting, found them, and each took one of them to wife. After
a time they again went hunting, and did not come back. So when the son of
the youngest princess, who had also been enchanted away, grew up, he set
out in search of his mother and father and uncles, and at last discovered
that the seven princes had been turned into stone by the magician
Punchkin, who had shut up the princess in a tower because she would not
marry him. Recognising her son, she plotted with him to feign agreement to
marry Punchkin if he would tell her where the secret of his life was
hidden. Overjoyed at her yielding to his wish, the magician told her that
it was true that he was not as others.

    “Far, far away, hundreds of thousands of miles from this, there lies a
    desolate country covered with thick jungle. In the midst of the jungle
    grows a circle of palm-trees, and in the centre of the circle stand
    six chattees full of water, piled one above another; below the sixth
    chattee is a small cage which contains a little green parrot; on the
    life of the parrot depends my life, and if the parrot is killed I must
    die. But,” he added, “this was not possible, because thousands of
    genii surround the palm-trees, and kill all who approach the place.”

The princess told her son this, and he set forth on his journey. On the
way he rescued some young eagles from a serpent, and the grateful birds
carried him until they reached the jungle, where, the genii being overcome
with sleep by the heat, the eaglets swooped down. “Down jumped the prince;
in an instant he had overthrown the chattees full of water and seized the
parrot, which he rolled up in his cloak,” then mounted again into the air
and was carried back to Punchkin’s palace. Punchkin was dismayed to see
the parrot in the prince’s hands, and asked him to name any price he
willed for it, whereupon the prince demanded the restoration of his father
and his uncles to life. This was done; then he insisted on Punchkin doing
the like to “all whom he had thus imprisoned,” when, at the waving of the
magician’s wand, the whole garden became suddenly alive.

“Give me my parrot!” cried Punchkin. Then the boy took hold of the
parrot, and tore off one of his wings; and as he did so the magician’s
right arm fell off. He then pulled off the parrot’s second wing, and
Punchkin’s left arm fell off; then he pulled off the bird’s legs, and down
fell the magician’s right leg and left leg. Nothing remained of him save
the limbless body and the head; but still he rolled his eyes, and cried,
“Give me my parrot!” “Take your parrot, then,” cried the boy, and with
that he wrung the bird’s neck, and threw it at the magician, and as he did
so, Punchkin’s head twisted round, and, with a fearful groan, he died. Of
course, all the rest “lived very happily ever afterwards,” as they do in
the plays and the novels.

In the stories of _Chundum Rajah_, and of _Sodewa Bai_, the Hindu
Cinderella, the heroine’s soul is contained in a string of golden beads.
When the Ranee, jealous of her husband’s love for Sodewa Bai, asked her
why she always wore the same beads, she replies: “I was born with them
round my neck, and the wise men told my father and mother that they
contained my soul, and that if any one else wore them I should die.”
Whereupon the Ranee instructed her servant to steal the beads from the
princess when she slept; then she died, but her body did not decay, and in
the end she was restored to life by the recovery of her necklace. In the
Bengali tale, _Life’s Secret_, a Rajah’s favourite wife gives birth
miraculously to a boy, whose soul is bound up in a necklace in the stomach
of a boal-fish. In both instances the ornaments are stolen, and while
they are worn by the thieves, prince and princess alike are lifeless,
whilst with the recovery of the beads life returned to each. A not unlike
idea occurs in the story, _Truth’s Triumph_. The children of a village
beauty, whom the Rajah had married, are changed into mango trees, to save
them from the fury of the jealous Ranee, until the time of danger was
past.

In Miss Stokes’ collection of _Indian Fairy Tales_, we have variants
corresponding more closely to _Punchkin_. In _Brave Hirálálbásá_, a
Rakshas (the common name for demon) is induced to reveal the secret of his
life. He says, “Sixteen miles from here is a tree, round it are tigers and
bears and other animals, on the top of it is a large flat snake, on the
head of which is a bird in a cage, and my soul is in that bird.” By
enchantment Hirálálbásá reached the tree and secured the cage. He pulled
the bird’s limbs off, and the Rakshas’ arms and legs fell off; then he
wrung its neck, and the Rakshas fell dead. And in the tale of _The Demon
and the King’s Son_, from the same collection, the prince falls in love
with the monster’s daughter, who is dead during the day and alive in the
night. The prince asks what she would do, if whilst she is dead, her
father were to be killed? She tells him it is impossible for any one to
kill her father, for his life is in a _mainá_ (starling), which is in a
nest in a tree on the other side of the sea, and if, she adds, any one in
killing the bird spilt the blood on the ground, a hundred demons would be
born from it. The prince reached the other side, and taking the _mainá_,
proceeded to kill it, but first wrapt it in his handkerchief, that no
blood might be spilt. The demon, who was far away, knew that the bird was
caught, and he set out at once to avert his doom. The story ends, like the
preceding one, with the dismemberment of the bird, and the consequent
death of the demon.

The nearest approach to tales similar to these in the _Buddhist
Birth-stories_, is in one or two isolated cases, when the Karma of a human
being is spoken of as immediately transferred to an animal.

In _Tales from the Norse_ the one in most striking correspondence with the
Punchkin group is that of _The giant who had no heart in his body_. The
monster turns six princes and their wives into stone, whereupon the
seventh and only surviving son, Boots, sets out to avenge their fate. On
his journey he saves the lives of a raven, a salmon, and a wolf, and the
wolf, having eaten his horse, compensates Boots by carrying him to the
giant’s castle, where the lovely princess who is to be his bride is
confined. She promises to find out where the giant keeps his heart, and by
blandishments and divers arts known to the fair sex both before and since
the time of Delilah, she worms out the secret. He tells her that “far, far
away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a church; in that
church is a well; in that well swims a duck; in that duck is an egg; and
in that egg lies my heart, you darling!” Boots, taking fond farewell of
the princess, rides on the wolf’s back to the island. Then the raven he
had befriended flies to the steeple and fetches the key of the church; the
salmon, in like return for kindness, brings him the egg from the well
where the duck had dropped it.

    Then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon as ever he did
    so, the giant screamed out. “Squeeze it again,” said the wolf; and
    when the prince did so, the giant screamed still more piteously, and
    begged and prayed so prettily to be spared, saying he would do all
    that the prince wished if he would only not squeeze his heart in two.
    “Tell him if he will restore to life again your six brothers and their
    brides, you will spare his life,” said the wolf. Yes, the giant was
    ready to do that, and he turned the six brothers into kings’ sons
    again, and their brides into kings’ daughters. “Now squeeze the egg in
    two,” said the wolf. With questionable morality, doing evil that good
    might come, Boots squeezed the egg to pieces, and the giant burst at
    once.

Asbjörnsen’s _New Series_ gives a variant in which a Troll who has seized
a princess tells her that he and all his companions will burst, as did the
heartless giant, when there passes above them “the grain of sand that lies
under the ninth tongue in the ninth head” of a certain dragon. The grain
of sand is found and passed over them, when the Troll and all his brood
are destroyed. In the Gaelic stories, for which we are indebted to the
skill of an early worker in this field, the late Mr. J. F. Campbell, that
of the _Young King of Easaidh Ruadh_ locates the secret thus: “There is a
great flagstone underneath the threshold. There is a wether under the
flagstone. There is a duck in the wether’s belly, and an egg in the duck,
in the egg is my soul.” In the _Sea-Maiden_ there is a “great beast with
three heads, which cannot be killed until an egg is broken which is in the
mouth of a trout, which springs out of a crow, which flies out of a hind,
which lives on an island in the middle of the loch.”

In his valuable collection of _Russian Folk-Tales_, which is enriched by
comparative notes, Mr. Ralston supplies some interesting variants of
Punchkin. Koshchei, called “the immortal or deathless,” is merely one of
the many incarnations of the dark spirit which takes so many monstrous
shapes in folk-tales. Sometimes his death, that is, the object with which
his life is indissolubly connected, does exist within his body. In one
story he carries off a queen, for whom her three sons, one after another,
go in search. Prince Ivan, the youngest, at last discovers where his
mother dwells, and she at the approach of Koshchei hides her son away. The
monster sniffs the blood of a Russian, and inquires if her son has not
been with her. She assures him it is only the Russian air in his nostrils.
Then after talking to him affectionately on one thing and another, she
asks where his death is, and he tells her that, “under an oak is a casket,
in the casket is a hare, in the hare is a duck, in the duck an egg, in the
egg is my death.” Prince Ivan found the egg, and reached his mother’s
house with it. Presently Koshchei flew in and said, “Phoo, phoo; no
Russian bone can the ear hear or the eye see, but there’s a smell of
Russia here.” Then Prince Ivan came out from his hiding place, and,
holding up the egg, said, “There is your death, oh Koshchei!” then he
smashed it, and Koshchei fell dead. In another story Koshchei is killed by
a blow on the forehead from the mysterious egg. Mr. Ralston also quotes a
Transylvanian Saxon story concerning a witch’s life, which is a light
burning in an egg inside a duck that swims on a pond inside a mountain,
and she dies when the light is put out. In the Bohemian story of the
_Sun-horse_ a warlock’s strength lies in an egg in a duck, which is within
a stag under a tree. A seer finds the egg and sucks it. Then the warlock
becomes as weak as a child, “for all his strength had passed into the
seer.”

In Servian folk-tale the strength of a baleful being who had stolen a
princess lies in a bird which is inside the heart of a fox, and when the
bird was taken out of the heart and set on fire, that moment the
wife-stealer falls down dead, and the prince regains his bride. From the
same source we have the tale of the _Golden-haired Twins_, with an
incident akin to that in Punchkin. When the king’s stepmother buries the
twins whom she had stolen, there spring from the spot where they lie trees
with golden leaves and blossoms. The king’s admiration of them aroused her
jealousy, and she had them cut down, but eventually his golden-haired
princes are restored to him.

Thus far the illustrations have been drawn solely from the folk-tales of
the widespread Indo-European races, but they are not confined to these.
From non-Aryan sources we have the Tatar story of the demon-giant who
kept his soul in a twelve-headed snake carried in a bag on his horse’s
back. The hero finds out the secret, kills the snake, and the giant dies.
In one of the Samoyed tales a man had no heart in his body, and could
recover it only on restoring to life a woman whom he had killed. Then the
man said to his wife, “Go to the place where the dead lies; there you will
find a purse, in that purse is her soul; shake the purse over her bones,
and she will come to life.” The wife did as she was ordered, and the woman
revived, whereupon her son dashed the heart to the ground, and the man
died.[75]

More elaborate than these are the tales from _The Thousand and One
Nights_. In _Seyf-el-Mulook_ the jinnee’s soul is enclosed in the crop of
a sparrow, and the sparrow is imprisoned in a small box, and this is in
seven other boxes which are put into seven chests; these are enclosed in a
coffer of marble that is sunk in the ocean surrounding the world. By the
aid of Suleyman’s seal-ring Seyf-el-Mulook raises the coffer, and
extricating the sparrow, strangles it, whereupon the jinnee’s body is
converted into a heap of black ashes. In some tales not included by
Galland or Lane, which Mr. Kirby has translated and edited under the title
of the _New Arabian Nights_, we have a variant of the above under the
title of _Joadar of Cairo and Mahmood of Tunis_. Joadar is bent on
releasing his enchanted betrothed, which he does by also strangling a
sparrow, the ogre being simultaneously dissolved into a heap of ashes.

The most venerable illustration of the leading idea in the Punchkin group
is however found, though in more subtle form, in the Egyptian tale of the
_Two Brothers_. This is of great value on account of its high antiquity,
and, moreover, specially interesting as recording an incident similar to
that narrated in the life of Joseph. It is contained in the D’Orbiney
papyrus preserved in the Bibliothèque Impériale, the date being about the
fourteenth or fifteenth century B.C.

There were two brothers, Anepou and Satou, joined as one in love and
labour. One day Satou was sent to fetch seed-corn from Anepou’s house,
where he found his brother’s wife adorning her hair. She urged him to stay
with her, but he refused, promising, however, to keep her wickedness
secret. When Anepou returned at even, she, being afraid, “made herself to
seem as a woman that had suffered violence,” and told him exactly the
reverse of what had happened. Anepou’s wrath was kindled against Satou,
and he went out to slay him; but Satou called on Phra to save him, and the
god placed a river between the brothers, so that when day dawned Anepou
might hear the truth. At sunrise Satou tells his story, and, mutilating
himself, he says that he will leave Anepou and go to the valley of the
cedar, in the cones of which he will deposit his heart, “so that if the
tree be cut his heart will fall to the earth, and he must die.”

For us the value of these folk-tales lies in the relics of barbaric
notions concerning the nature of man and his relation to external things
which they preserve. They have amused our youth-hood; they may instruct
our manhood. But if we go to the solar mythologists for their
interpretation, we shall learn from Sir G. W. Cox that the “magician
Punchkin and the heartless giant are only other forms of the Panis who
steal bright treasures from the gleaming west,” that “Balna herself is
Helen shut up in Ilion ... the eagles the bright clouds,”[76] and from
Professor de Gubernatis that the duck is the dawn and the egg the sun.

These venerable tales have a larger, richer meaning than this, expressive
of the wonder deep-seated in the heart of man. Like the “drusy” cavity in
granite rock which, when broken open, reveals beautiful prisms of topaz
and beryl, the folk-tales disclose under analysis that thought, now
crystallised, which confuses ideas and objects, illusions and realities,
substances and shadows.


§ IX.

BARBARIC AND CIVILISED NOTIONS OF THE SOUL’S NATURE.

In proof of the closing remarks in § VII., that the breath has given the
chief name to the soul, we find the Western Australians using the same
word, _waug_, for “breath, spirit, soul”; in Java the word _nawa_ is used
for “health, life, soul”; in the Dakota tongue _niya_ is literally
“breath,” figuratively “life”; in Netela _piuts_ is “breath” and “soul”;
in Eskimo _silla_ means “air” and “wind,” and is also the word that
conveys the highest idea of the world as a whole, and of the reasoning
faculty. The supreme existence they call _Sillam Innua_, Owner of the Air,
or of the All; in the Yakama tongue of Oregon _wkrisha_ signifies “there
is wind,” _wkrishwit_, “life”; with the Aztecs _ehecatl_ expressed “air,
life, and the soul,” and, personified in their myths, it was said to have
been born of the breath of Tezcatlipoca, their highest divinity, who
himself is often called Yoalliehecatl, the Wind of Night.[77] This
identity of wind with breath, of breath with spirit, and thence of spirit
with the Great Spirit, which

  “Sees God in clouds, and hears Him in the wind,”

has further illustration in the legends of the Quiches, in which the
unknown creative power is Hurakan, a name familiar to us under the form
_hurricane_, and in our own sacred records, where the advent of the Holy
Spirit is described “as of a rushing mighty wind.” In the Mohawk language
_atonritz_, the “soul,” is from _atonrion_, “to breathe”; whilst, as
showing the analogy between the effects of restricted sense and restricted
civilisation, Dr. Tylor quotes the case of a girl who was a deaf-mute as
well as blind, and who, when telling a dream in gesture language, said:
“I thought God took away my breath to heaven.” Among the higher languages
the same evidence abides.

  “The spirit doth but mean the breath.”

That word _spirit_ is derived from a verb _spirare_, which means “to draw
breath.” _Animus_, “the mind,” is cognate with _anima_, “air”; in Irish,
which belongs to the same family of speech as Latin, namely, the Aryan or
Indo-European, we have _anal_, “breath,” and _anam_, “life,” or “soul”;
and in Sanskrit we find the root _an_, to “blow” or “breathe,” whence
_anila_, “wind,” and in Greek _anemos_, with the like meaning. In
Hampole’s _Ayenbite of Inwyt_, _i.e._ “Prick or Remorse of Conscience,” a
poem of the fourteenth century, we find _ande_ or “breath” used as “soul.”

  “Thus sall ilka saul other se (_i.e._ in the other world)
   For nan of tham may feled be
   Na mar than here a man, ande may
   When it passes fra his mouthe away.”[78]

The Greek _psyche_, _pneuma_, and _thymos_, each meaning “soul” and
“spirit,” are from roots expressing the wind or breath. In Slavonic the
root _du_ has developed the meaning of breath into that of soul or spirit,
and the dialect of the gipsies has _duk_ with the meanings of breath,
spirit, ghost. That word _ghost_, the German _geist_, the Dutch _geest_,
from a root meaning “to blow with violence,” is connected with _gust_,
_gas_, _geyser_; in Scandinavian, _glösor_, “to pour forth.” In non-Aryan
languages, as the Finnish, _far_ means “soul, breath, spirit, wind”;
_henki_, “spirit, person, breath, air”; the Hebrew _nephesh_, “breath,”
has also the meanings of “life, soul, mind”; and _ruach_ and _neshamah_,
to which the Arabic _nefs_ and _ruh_ correspond, pass from meaning
“breath” to “spirit.” The legend of man’s creation records that he became
a living soul through God breathing into his nostrils “the breath of
life,” and concerning this the Psalmist says of all that live, “Thou
takest away their breath, they die, and return unto the dust.” As a final
illustration, the Egyptian _kneph_ has the alternative meanings of “life”
and “breath.”[79]

When we pass from names to descriptions, we find the same underlying idea
of the ethereal nature of spirit. The natives of Nicaragua, California,
and other countries remote from these, agree in describing the other self
as air or breeze, which passes in and out through the mouth and nostrils.
The Tongans conceived it as the aëriform part of the body, related to it
as the perfume to the flower. The Greenlanders describe it as pale and
soft, as without flesh and bone, so that he who tries to seize it grasps
nothing. The Lapps say that the ghosts are invisible to all but the
Shamans. The Congo negroes leave the house of the dead unswept for a year,
lest the dust should injure the delicate substance of the ghost; and the
German peasants have a saying that a door should not be slammed, lest a
soul gets pinched in it. In some parts of Northern Europe, when the
wind-god, Odin, rides the sky with his furious spectral host, the peasants
open the windows of every sick-room that the soul of the dying may have
free exit to join the wild chase; whilst both here and in France it is
still no uncommon practice to open doors and windows that the soul may
depart quickly. Dr. Tylor[80] cites a passage from Hampole, in which the
author speaks of the intenser suffering which the soul undergoes in
purgatory by reason of its delicate organisation.

  “The soul is more tendre and nesche (soft)
   Than the bodi that hath bones and fleysche;
   Thanne the soul that is so tendere of kinde,
   Mote nedis hure penaunce hardere-y-finde,
   Than eni bodi that evere on live was,”

a doctrine clearly due to Patristic theories of incorporeal souls. And a
modern poet, Dante Rossetti, in his _Blessed Damozel_, when he describes
her as leaning out from the gold bar of heaven and looking down towards
the earth, that “spins like a fretful midge,” whence she awaits the coming
of her lover, depicts the souls mounting up to God as passing by her “like
thin flames.” The Greeks and, following them, the Romans, conceived the
soul as of thin, impalpable texture, as exhaled with the dying breath, or,
as in Homer, rushing out through the wound that causes the warrior’s
death. In the metaphysical Arabian romance of Yokdhan, the hero seeks the
source of life and thought, and discovers in one of the cavities of the
heart a bluish vapour, which was the living soul. Among the Hebrews it was
of shadowy nature, with echoless motion, haunting a ghostly realm:

  “It is a land of shadows; yea, the land
   Itself is but a shadow, and the race
   That dwell therein are voices, forms of forms.”

Such conceptions are but little varied; and, to this day, the intelligence
of the major number of people who think about the thing at all presents
the departing soul as something vaporous, as a little white cloud.

In keeping with such ideas, the belief in transfer of spirit expresses
itself. Algonquin women who desired to become mothers flocked to the couch
of those about to die, in hope that the vital principle as it passed from
the body would enter theirs. Among the Seminoles of Florida, when a woman
died in childbirth, the infant was held over her face to receive her
parting spirit, and thus acquire strength and knowledge for its future
use. So among the Tákahlis, the priest is accustomed to lay his hand on
the head of the nearest relative of the deceased, and to blow into him the
soul of the departed, which is supposed to come to life in his next
child.[81]

In Harland and Wilkinson’s _Lancashire Folk-lore_ it is related that while
a well-known witch lay dying, “she must needs, before she could ‘shuffle
off this mortal coil,’ transfer her _familiar spirit_ to some trusty
successor. An intimate acquaintance from a neighbouring township was
consequently sent for in all haste, and on her arrival was immediately
closeted with her dying friend. What passed between them has never fully
transpired, but it is asserted that at the close of the interview this
associate _received the witch’s last breath into her mouth, and with it
her familiar spirit_. The powers for good or evil of the dreaded woman
were thus transferred to her companion, and on passing along the road from
Burnley to Blackburn we can point out a farmhouse at no great distance,
with whose thrifty matron no neighbouring farmer will yet dare to
quarrel.” When a Roman lay at the point of death, his nearest relative
inhaled the last breath; in New Testament story, the risen Jesus breathes
on His disciples, that they may receive the Holy Spirit, and the form thus
adopted in conferring supernatural grace is still used in the rites and
ceremonies of the Catholic Church.

Speculation about the other self could not, however, stop at identifying
it with a man’s breath or shadow, or with regarding it as absolutely
impalpable. These nebulous and gaseous theories necessarily condensed, as
it were, into theories of semi-substantiality still charged with ethereal
conceptions, but giving embodiment to the soul to account for the
appearances of both dead and living in dreams, when their persons were
clasped, their forms and features seen, and their voices heard.

Such theories involve a kind of continuity of identity, and often take the
form of belief in the soul as a replica of the body, and as suffering
corresponding mutilation. When the native Australian has slain his foe, he
cuts off his right thumb, so as to prevent him from throwing a shadowy
spear; the Chinese dread of decapitation, lest their spirits are headless,
is well known; but a more telling illustration is that cited by Dr. Tylor,
from Waitz, of the West Indian planter, whose slaves sought refuge from
the lash and toil in suicide. But he was too cunning for them; he cut off
the heads and hands of the corpses, that the survivors might see that not
even death could save them from a taskmaster who could maim their souls in
the next world. Among advanced nations the same conceptions survived.
Achilles, resting by the shore, sees the dead Patroclus in a dream. “Ay
me, there remaineth then, even in the house of Hades, a spirit and phantom
of the dead, albeit the life be not anywise therein; for all night long
hath the ghost of hapless Patroclus stood over me, wailing and making
moan, and wondrous like his living self it seemed.”[82] Virgil portrays
Æneas, and Homer describes Ulysses, as recognising their old comrades
when they enter the “viewless shades,” where the dwellers continue the
tasks of their earthly life. In Hebrew legend Saul recognises the shade of
Samuel when the magic spell of the Witch of Endor evokes it, although the
grave of the old “judge” was sixty miles away. The monarch-shades of
“Sheol” hail with derision the entrance of the King of Babylon among them.
In New Testament narrative the risen Jesus is alternately material and
spiritual, now passing through closed doors, and now submitting his
wound-prints to the touch of the doubter. In _Hamlet_ the ghost is as “the
air, invulnerable,” yet “like a king” ...

  “... that fair and warlike form
   In which the majesty of buried Denmark
   Did sometimes march.”

Notions of material punishments and rewards involved notions of a material
soul, even pending its reunion with the body at the general resurrection.
The angels are depicted as weighing souls in a literal balance, while
devils clinging to the scales endeavour to disturb the equilibrium.[83] In
some frescoes of the fourteenth century, on the walls of the Campo Santo,
at Pisa, illustrations of these notions abound; the soul is portrayed as a
sexless child rising out of the mouth of the corpse, and eagerly awaited
as the crown of rejoicing of the angels, or as the lawful prey of the
demons. After this it is amusing to learn that extreme tests of the
weight of ghosts are now and then forthcoming,[84] from the assertion of a
Basuto divine that the late queen had been bestriding his shoulders, and
he never felt such a weight in his life, to the alleged modern
spiritualistic reckoning of the weight of a human soul at from three to
four ounces! And do not spirit-photographs adorn the albums of the
credulous?


§ X.

BARBARIC BELIEF IN SOULS IN BRUTES AND PLANTS AND LIFELESS THINGS.

More graceful is the conception which makes the soul spring up as a flower
or cleave the air as a bird. It is, of course, the purified survival of
the primitive thought which did not limit its belief in an indwelling
spirit to man, but extended it to brutes and plants, and even to lifeless
things. For the lower creatures manifested the phenomena from which the
belief in spirits in higher creatures was inferred. They moved and
breathed, their life ceased with their breath; they cast shadows and
reflections; their cries, which to the savage seemed so like human
speech,[85] awakened echoes; and they appeared in dreams. Among the
western tribes of North America the phantoms of all animals are supposed
to go to the happy beasts’ grounds, and in Assam the ghosts of those slain
become the property of the hunter who kills them; whilst the custom of
begging pardon of the animal before or after despatching it, as among the
Red Indians, who even put the pipe of peace in the dead creature’s mouth,
further evidences to barbarian belief in beast-souls. Although the belief
in the immortality of brutes has now no place in serious philosophy, it
has been a favourite doctrine from the Kamchadales, who believe in the
after-life of flies and bugs, to the eminent naturalist Agassiz, who
advocates the doctrine in his _Essay on Classification_; and in a list of
4977 books on the nature and future of the soul given in Mr. Alger’s
elaborate critical history of the subject, nearly 200 deal with the
after-life of animals. The advocates have often felt the difficulty of
granting this after-life to man and denying it to creatures to which he
stands so closely related in ultimate community of origin; but science,
while it finds links of sympathy with the ideas of rude races respecting
the common life of all that moves, and presents evidence in support of the
common destiny, lends no support to the doctrine of the immortality of
oysters. The custom of apologising to doomed brutes is practised in regard
to plants. If they exhibit the phenomena of life in a lesser degree,
enough are shown to justify the accrediting of them with souls. Besides
flinging wavy shadows and reflections (and it cannot be too often enforced
that to the barbaric intelligence motion is a prime sign of life), they
are not voiceless. Murmurs are heard in their leaves; sounds echo from
their hollow trunks, or tremble, Æolian-like, through their branches; and
in their juices are the sources of repose or frenzy.

“The Ojibways believed that trees had souls, and in pagan times they
seldom cut down green or living trees, for they thought it put them to
pain. They pretended to hear the wailing of the trees when they suffered
in this way. On account of these noises, real or imaginary, trees have had
spirits assigned them, and worship offered to them. A mountain-ash, in the
vicinity of South Ste. Marie, which made a noise, had offerings piled up
around it. If a tree should emit from its hollow trunk or branches a sound
during a calm state of the atmosphere, or should any one fancy such
sounds, the tree would be at once reported, and soon come to be regarded
as the residence of some local god.”[86] As expressed in Greek myth,
purified in this case from grosser elements, we have the Dryades, who were
believed to die together with the trees in which their life had begun to
be, and in which they had dwelt. As expressed in folk-lore and its poetic
forms, it is in the growth or blossoming of flowers, or the intertwining
of branches, that the idea survives. In the ballad of “Fair Margaret and
Sweet William”--

  “Out of her brest there sprang a _rose_,
   And out of his a _briar_;
   They grew till they grew unto the church-top,
   And there they tyed in a true lover’s knot;”[87]

in the story of “Tristram and Ysonde,” “from his grave there grew an
eglantine which twined about the statue, a marvel for all men to see; and,
though three times they cut it down, it grew again, and ever wound its
arms about the image of the fair Ysonde;”[88] while the conception often
lends itself to the poet’s thoughts, from Laertes’ words over Ophelia:--

            “Lay her i’ the earth,
  And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
  May violets spring,”

to Tennyson’s

  “And from his ashes may be made
   The violet of his native land.”

In Grimm’s _Teutonic Mythology_ a number of illustrations are supplied of
the vagaries of popular imagination, which picture the soul as a bird
flying out of a dead person’s mouth, and, as a cognate example from rude
culture, we find a belief among the Powhatans that “a certain small wood
bird received the souls of their princes at death, and they religiously
refrained from doing it harm; while the Aztecs and various other nations
thought that all good people, as a reward of merit, were metamorphosed at
the close of life into feathered songsters of the grove, and in this form
passed a certain term in the umbrageous bowers of Paradise.”[89] But many
pages might be filled with examples of varying conceptions of the soul,
the major number of which (for the idea of it as a mouse, snake, etc.,
must not be forgotten) have as their nucleus its ethereal nature and
freedom from the limitations of solid earth, although round that nucleus
gather some more concrete ideas for the mind, desiring something more
substantial than symbols, to grasp. The belief that inanimate things as
well as animals and plants have a dual being is not so obvious at first
sight, and yet, given the reasons for the latter, there are as good
grounds, because like in kind, for the former. The Algonquins told Father
Charlevoix that “since hatchets and kettles have shadows, as well as men
and women, it follows that these shadows must pass along with human
shadows into the spirit-land.” When the tools or weapons are injured or
done with, their souls must cross the water to the Great Village, where
the sun sets. Besides, spears and pots and pans, as well as men and dogs,
appear in dreams; they throw shadows and images in the water, they give
forth a sound when struck, and, as the Fijians also argue, “if an animal
or plant die, its soul goes to Bolotoo; if a stone or anything else is
broken, it has its reward there; nay, has equal good luck with men and
hogs and yams. If an axe or a chisel is worn out or broken up, away flies
its soul for the service of the gods.” Logically, the savage who believes
that in the other world

  “The hunter still the deer pursues,
   The hunter and the deer a shade,”

must put in the hands of the one a shadow spear. So when an Ojibway
chief, after a four days’ trance, gave an account of his visit to the land
of shadows, he told of the hosts whom he had met travelling there laden
with pipes and kettles and weapons. These primitive ideas explain, once
and for all, matters which have too often been explained by fanciful
theories, or cited as evidences of the benighted condition of those places
which on missionary maps of the world are painted black. They disclose the
reason why food and utensils and weapons were broken and buried with the
dead; why fires were lighted round the grave; why animals were slain on
the death of a chief; why the Greenlanders, when a child dies, bury a dog
with him, because the dog, they say, is able to find his way anywhere; why
North American Indian mothers in pathetic custom drop their milk on the
lips of the dead child; and why, what seemed so inexplicable to the early
missionaries to the East, ignorant of the practice of widow-sacrifice
among the ancient peoples of the West, as the Gauls, Teutons, and others,
wives and slaves were burned on the funeral pyre. Among the Mexicans
sometimes a very rich man would even have his chaplain slaughtered, that
he might not be deprived of his support in the other world.

In their initial stage all these gifts are made, all these rites
performed, for the supposed need of the dead. Every one had his _manes_,
which followed him into the next world, and, lacking which, he would be as
poor as if in this world he had lacked it. The spiritual counterpart of
the offerings was consumed by his spirit, just as the old deities were
thought to enjoy the sweet-smelling savour of the burnt sacrifices; the
fires were kindled that the soul might not grope about in darkness. So the
obolus was put into the mouth of the dead, that its _manes_ might be
payment to Charon for the ferry of the Styx, as money is put in the
corpse’s hand or mouth among the German and Irish peasants to this day; so
the warrior’s horse was slain at his tomb and the armour laid therein,
that he might enter Valhalla riding, and clothed with the tokens of his
right to the abode reserved for those who had fallen in battle.

Any explanation of customs like the foregoing, persistent as they are in
kind, however varying in expression, is defective which does not take into
account what large part the emotions play in all that is connected with
death, and how they infuse such customs with vitality. The bereaved refuse
to believe that those whom they have lost have no more concern in the
interests of life once common and dear to both. As among the Dakotas, when
a mother feels a pain at her breast, they say that her dead child is
thinking of her. The place where the body lies becomes the connecting link
between it and the soul which is still the solicitude and care, or, it may
be, the dread of the living; succouring and protecting, or, on the other
hand, avenging.

The element of dread undoubtedly comes into play early. The awe which we
feel in the presence of death, or in passing in the dark through a
churchyard, takes in the savage the form of terror. The behaviour of the
ghost in dreams, its ability to do what men still in the flesh cannot do,
quicken the belief in occult power, and the desire to propitiate it. Among
the Lapps red-hot stones are cast behind the coffins of the dead, and
their graves fenced round to prevent their return to earth. The articles
placed in the grave as gifts for the dead become sacrifices laid on the
altar to appease malignant spirits; the mound or tomb becomes a temple,
and awe passes by easy degrees into worship. The prevalence in one form or
another of ancestor-worship has, as remarked already, led Mr. Spencer to
the conclusion that it is the rudimentary form of all religions; even sun,
moon, volcano, river, etc., being feared and adored because they were
believed to be the dwelling-places of ancestral ghosts. The facts are
against this theory. It is to the larger, the more impressive phenomena of
the natural world, the sun in noontide strength and splendour, the
lightning and the thunder, that we must look for the primary causes which
awakened the fear, the wonder, and the adoration in which lie the germs of
the highest religions. Such causes are not only sufficient, but more
operative on the undeveloped intelligence than the belief in ancestral
spirits of the mountain and the sea, which involves a more complex mental
action.[90] The one is contributory, but subordinate, to the other. It is,
as M. Réville remarks, “the phenomena of nature regarded as animated and
conscious that wake and stimulate the religious sentiments, and become
the objects of the adoration of man.... If nature-worship, with the
animism that it engenders,[91] shapes the first law to which nascent
religion submits in the human race, anthropomorphism furnishes the second,
disengaging itself ever more and more completely from the zoomorphism
which generally serves as an intermediary. This is so _everywhere_.”[92]


§ XI.

BARBARIC AND CIVILISED NOTIONS ABOUT THE SOUL’S DWELLING-PLACE.

The existence of the ghost-soul or other self being unquestioned, the
inquiry follows, where does it dwell? Like the trolls of Norse myth, who
burst at sunrise, the flitting spirit vanishes in the light and comes with
the darkness; but what places does it haunt when the quiet of the night is
unbroken by its intrusion, and where are they?

The answers to these are as varied as the vagaries of rude imagination
permit. We must not expect to find any theories of the soul’s prolonged
after-existence among races who have but a dim remembrance of yesterday,
and but a hazy conception of a to-morrow. Neither, among such, any
theories of the soul abiding in a place of reward or punishment, as the
result of things done in the body. Speaking of the heaven of the Red man,
Dr. Brinton remarks that “nowhere was any well-defined doctrine that moral
turpitude was judged and punished in the next world. No contrast is
discoverable between a place of torment and a realm of joy; at the worst
but a negative castigation awaited the liar, the coward, or the niggard.”
Ideas of a devil and a hell are altogether absent from the barbaric mind,
since it is obvious that any theory of retribution could arise only when
man’s moral nature had so developed as to awaken questions about the
government of the universe, and to call another world into existence to
redress the wrongs and balance the injustices of this. His earliest
queries were concerned with the whereabouts of the soul more than with its
destiny, and it was, and still is, among the lower races, thought of as
haunting its old abode or the burial-place of its body, and as acting very
much as it had acted when in the flesh. The shade of the Algonquin hunter
chases the spirits of the beaver and the elk with the spirits of his bow
and arrow, and stalks on the spirits of his snow-shoes over the spirit of
the snow. Among the Costa Ricans the spirits of the dead are supposed to
remain near their bodies for a year, and the explorer Swan relates that
when he was with the North-Western Indians he was not allowed to attend a
funeral, lest he offended the spirits hovering round; whilst the Indians
of North America often destroy or abandon the dwellings of the dead, the
object being to prevent the ghost from returning, or to leave it free so
to do. But it is needless to multiply illustrations of a belief which has
been persistent in the human mind from the dawn of speculation about the
future of the soul to the present day. The barbarians who think that the
spirits of the dead move and have their being near the living, join them
on their journeys, and sit down, unseen visitants, at their feasts (to be
driven off, as among the Eskimos, by blowing the breath), are one with the
multitudes of folks in Europe and America who, sorrowing over their dead,
think of them as ministering with unfelt hands, and as keenly interested
in their concerns.

  “We meet them at the doorway, on the stair,
   Along the passages they come and go,
   Impalpable impressions on the air,
   A sense of something moving to and fro.”

The Ojibway, who detects their tiny voices in the insect’s hum, and thinks
of them as sheltering themselves from the rain by thousands in a flower,
as sporting by myriads on a sunbeam, is one with the Schoolmen who
speculated on the number of angels that could dance on a needle’s point,
and with Milton in his poetic rendering of the belief of his time, that

  “Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth
   Unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep.”

The Hottentot who avoids a dead man’s hut lest the ghost be within, is one
with the believers in haunted houses, in banshees, wraiths, and spectres.
Such as he should not be excluded as “corresponding members” of the
Society for Psychical Research in the invitations[93] which its committee
issues to folks who have seen apparitions, and slept, or tried to sleep,
in the dreaded chamber of some moated hall of mystery.

If we look in vain for any consistency of idea or logical relation in
barbaric notions, our wonder ceases at the absence of these when we note
the conflicting conceptions entertained among intelligent people. But the
underlying thought is identical. The examples given in a foregoing section
on the belief in the passage of the soul into other human bodies, into
animals and stones, strengthened as this is by the likeness in mind and
body between children and dead relatives, by the human expression noted on
many a brute, by the human shape of many a stone, show how the theory of
the soul as nigh at hand finds many-sided support. In this belief, too,
lie the germs of theories of successive transmigrations elaborated in the
faiths of advanced races, when the defects of body and character were
explained as the effects of sin committed in a former existence.

Next in order of conception appears to be that of the soul as living an
independent existence, an improved edition of the present, in an under or
upper world, into which the dead pass without distinction of caste or
worth.

The things dreamed about respecting the land of spirits and their
occupations are woven of the materials of daily life. Whether to the
sleeping barbarian in his wigwam, or to the seer banished in Patmos;
whether to the Indian travelling in his dreams to the happy
hunting-ground, or to the apostle caught up in trance into paradise;
earth, and earth alone, supplies the materials out of which man everywhere
has shaped his heaven. Her dinted and furrowed surface; valleys and
mountain-tops; islands sleeping in summer seas, or fretted by winter
storms; cities walled and battlemented; glories of sunrise and sunset;
gave variety enough for play of the cherished hopes and imaginings of men.
If we collect any group of barbaric fancies, we find, speaking broadly,
that a large proportion have pictured the home of souls as in the west,
towards the land of the setting sun. Seen from many a standpoint to sink
beneath river, lake, or ocean, which for untutored man enclosed his world,
it led to the myth of waters of death dividing earth from heaven, which
the soul, often at perilous risk, must cross. Such was the Ginnunga-gap of
the Vikings; the nine seas and a half across which travellers to Manala,
the under-world of the Finns, must voyage; the great water of the Red
Indians; the Vaitarani of the Brahmans; the Stygian stream of the Greeks;
and the Jordan of the Christians, that flows between us and the Celestial
City, “where the surges cease to roll.” The sinking of the sun below the
horizon obviously led to belief in an under-world, whither the ghosts
went. Barbaric notions are full of this, and the lower culture out of
which their beliefs arose is evidenced in the Orcus of the Romans, the
Hades of the Greeks, the Helheim of the Norsemen, the Sheol of the
Hebrews, and the Amenti of the Egyptians, the solar features of which last
are clearly traceable in their doctrine. Among the Hebrews, Sheol
(translated, curiously enough, thirty-one times as “grave,” and thirty-one
times as “hell,” in our Authorised Version) was a vast cavernous space in
which the shades of good and bad alike wandered--“the small and great are
there, and the servant is free from his master.” It is akin in character
to the Greek Hades, where they “wander mid shadows and shade, and wail by
impassable streams.” As ideas of a Divine rule of the world grew, its
manifestations in justice were looked for, and the mystery of iniquity,
the wicked “flourishing like a green bay tree,” led to the conception of a
future state, in which Lazarus and Dives would change places. Sheol thus
became, on the one hand, a land of delight and repose for the faithful,
and, on the other hand, one of punishment for the wicked.

Persian, and still older, influences had largely leavened Hebrew
conceptions, and local conditions in Judea added pungent elements. The
Valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, “the place where lie the corpses of those
who have sinned against Jehovah, where their worm shall not die, neither
their fire be quenched;” the dreary volcanic region around the Dead Sea,
with its legend of doomed cities, supplied their imagery of hell with its
lake of fire and brimstone. And, as the belief travelled westward, it fell
into congenial soil. The sulphurous stench around Lacus Avernus, the smoke
of Vesuvius, Stromboli, and Etna, wreathed themselves round the hell of
Christianity and the under-world of barbaric myth; and from Talmudic
writer to classic poet, to Dante and to Milton, the imagination exhausted
the material of the horrible to describe the several tortures of the
damned. The hell of our northern forefathers remained below the flat
earth, but the cold, misty Niflheim melted away before the fiery perdition
of Christian dogma. And, in the region bordering thereon, the _limbus
patrum_, the _limbus infantum_, etc., we have the survival of belief in
separate hells characteristic of the Oriental religions, and of the
sub-divisions of the lower world in more rudimentary religions.

Beyond the narrow horizon which bounded the world of the ancients, lay the
imaginary land of the immortals, the Blessed, the Happy, the Fortunate
Isles. But as that horizon enlarged, the Elysian Fields and Banquet Halls
were transferred to an upper sphere. In the wonder aroused by the
firmament above, with its solid-looking vault across which sun, stars,
and clouds traversed; in the place it plays in dreams of barbarian and
patriarch, when the sleeper is carried thither; in its brightness of
noonday glory as contrasted with the dark sun-set under-world, we may find
some of the materials of which the theory of an upper world, a heaven
(“the heaved”) is made up. There the barbarian places his paradise to
which the rainbow and the Milky Way are roads; there he meets his kindred,
and lives where cold, disease, and age are not, but everlasting summer and
summer fruits. There, too, for the conceptions of advanced races are drawn
from the same sources, the civilised peoples of Europe and America have
placed their heaven. And, save in refinement of detail incident to
intellectual growth, there is nothing to choose between the earlier and
the later; the same gross delights, the same earth-born ideas are there,
whether we enter the Norseman’s Valhalla, the Moslem’s Paradise, or the
Christian’s New Jerusalem.


§ XII.

CONCLUSIONS FROM THE FOREGOING.

It would exceed the limits and purport of this book to follow the
extension of the belief in spirits to its extreme range; in other words,
to belief in controlling spirits in inanimate objects, which were advanced
_pari passu_ with man’s advancing conceptions to place and rank as the
higher gods of polytheism. Such belief, as already indicated, is the
outcome of that primitive philosophy which invests the elements above and
the earth beneath with departmental deities, until, through successive
stages of dualism, the idea of a Supreme Deity is reached, and the
approach is thus made towards a conception of the unity and unvarying
order of nature. Deferring reference to the part played by dreams as media
of communication between heaven and earth, and as warnings of coming
events, let us summarise the evidence which has been gathered, and ask
whether it warrants the conclusions drawn from it in the present work.

It has been shown that races have existed, and exist still, at so low a
level that their scanty stock of words has to be supplemented by gestures,
rendering converse in the dark next to impossible. Such people are
bewildered by any effort to count beyond their fingers; they have no idea
of the relation of things, or of their differences; they have no power of
generalisation by which to merge the accidental in the essential. They
believe that their names and likenesses are integral parts of themselves,
and that they can be bewitched or harmed through them at the hands of any
one who knows the one or has obtained the other. As an important result of
their confusion between the objective and the subjective, we find a vivid
and remarkable belief in the reality of their dreams. The events which
make up these are explained only on the theory that if the body did not
move from its sleeping place, something related to it did, and that the
people, both living and dead, who appeared in dream and vision, did in
very presence come. The puzzle is solved by the theory of a second self
which can leave the body and return to it. For the savage knows nothing of
_mind_. The belief in this other self is strengthened (possibly more or
less created) by its appearance in shadow or reflection, in mocking echo,
in various diseases, especially fits, when the sufferer is torn by an
indwelling foe, and writhes as if in his merciless grasp. The belief in
such a ghost-soul, as to the form and ethereal nature of which all kinds
of theories are started, is extended to animals and lifeless things, since
like evidence of its existence is supplied by them. The fire that destroys
his hut, the wind that blows it down, the lightning that darts from the
clouds and strikes his fellow-man dead beside him, the rain-storm that
floods his fields, the swollen river that sweeps away his store of
food--these and every other force manifest in nature add their weight to
the inferences which rude man has drawn. The phenomena which have
accounted for the vigour of life and the prostration of disease account
for the motion of things in heaven above and the earth beneath, and the
barbaric mind thus enlarges its belief in a twofold existence in man to a
far-reaching doctrine of spirits everywhere. Step by step, from ghost-soul
flitting round the wigwam to the great spirits indwelling in the powers of
nature, the belief in supernatural beings with physical qualities arises,
until the moral element comes in, and they appear as good and evil gods
contending for the mastery of the universe. Passing by details as to the
whereabouts of the other self and its doings and destiny in the other
world which the dream involves, and following the order of ideas on
scientific lines, two queries arise:--

1. Does the evidence before us suffice to warrant the conclusions drawn
from it as to the serious and permanent part which dreams have played in
the origin and growth of primitive belief in spirits; in short, of belief
in supernatural agencies from past to present times? In this place the
answer is brief. Of course the antecedent conditions of man’s developed
emotional nature, and of the universe of great and small, which is the
field of its exercise, are taken for granted.

The general animistic interpretation which man gives to phenomena at the
outset expressed itself in the particular conceptions of souls everywhere,
of which dreams and such-like things supplied the raw material. If they
did not, what did? Denying this, we must fall back on a theory of
intuition or on revelation. As to the former, it begs the whole question;
as to the latter, can that which is itself the subject of periodical
revision be an infallible authority on anything?

If dreams, apparitions, shadows, and the like, are sufficing causes, then,
in obedience to the Law of Parsimony (as it is termed in logic), we need
not invoke the play of higher causes when lower ones are found competent
to account for the effects. If it seems to some that the base is too
narrow, the foundation too weak for the superstructure, and that our
metaphysics and our beliefs regarding the invisible rest upon something
wider and stronger than the illusions of a remote savage ancestry, the
facts of man’s history may be adduced as witness to his continuous passage
into truth through illusions; to the vast revolutions and readjustments
made in his correction of the first impressions of the senses. There is
not a belief of the past, from the notions of savages about their dreams
and ghost-world to those of more advanced races about their spirit-realms
and its occupants, to which this does not apply. In the more delicate
observations of the astronomer he must, when estimating the position of
any celestial body, take into account its apparent displacement through
the refractive properties of the atmosphere, and must also allow for
defects of perception in himself due to what is called “personal
equation.” And in ascertaining our place in the scale of being, as well as
in seeking for the grounds of belief concerning our own nature, we have to
take into account the refracting media of dense ignorance and prejudice
through which these beliefs have come, and to allow for the confirming
error due to personal equation--fond desire. The result will be the
vanishing of illusions involving momentous changes in psychology, ethics,
and theology. Instead of groping among mental phenomena for explanations
of themselves, they will be analysed by the methods already indicated.
Instead of resting the authority for moral injunctions on innate ideas of
right and wrong, and on inspired statutes and standards, it will rest on
the accredited, because verifiable, experience of man. Instead of finding
incentives to, or restraints on, conduct by operating on men’s hope of
future reward, or fear of hell as “hangman’s whip to keep the wretch in
order,” they will be supplied by an ever-widening sense of duty, quickened
by love and loyalty to a supreme order, in obedience to which the ultimate
happiness of humanity in the life that is will be secured.

In this, and not in theories of an hereafter whose origin and persistence
are explained, will man find his satisfaction, and the springs of motive
to whatever is ennobling, lovely, and of good report. With the poet, who,
laying bare the sources of the unrest of his time, has led us to the
secret of its peace, he will ask--

          “Is it so small a thing
          To have enjoyed the sun,
          To have lived light in the spring,
          To have loved, to have thought, to have done,
  To have advanced true friends, and beat down baffling foes--
          That we should feign a bliss
          Of doubtful future date,
          And while we dream on this,
          Lose all our present state,
    And relegate to worlds yet distant our repose?”[94]

2. Does the theory of evolution in its application to the development of
the spiritual nature of man, and to the origin and growth of ideas, find
any breach of continuity? In its inclusion of him as a part of nature, in
accounting for his derivation from pre-human ancestry by a process of
natural selection, and in its proofs of his unbroken development from the
embryo to adult life, it embraces the growth and development of mind and
all that mind connotes. In the words of Professor Huxley, “As there is an
anatomy of the body, so there is an anatomy of the mind; the psychologist
dissects mental phenomena into elementary states of consciousness, as the
anatomist resolves limbs into tissues, and tissues into cells. The one
traces the development of complex organs from simple rudiments; the other
follows the building up of complex conceptions out of simpler constituents
of thought. As the physiologist inquires into the way in which the
so-called ‘functions’ of the body are performed, so the psychologist
studies the so-called ‘faculties’ of the mind. Even a cursory attention to
the ways and works of the lower animals suggests a comparative anatomy and
physiology of the mind; and the doctrine of evolution presses for
application as much in the one field as in the other.”[95]

Any coherent explanation of the operations of nature was impossible while
man had no conception or knowledge of the interplay of its several parts.
Now, by the doctrine of continuity, not only are present changes referred
to unvarying causes, but the past is interpreted by the processes going on
under our eyes. We can as easily calculate eclipses backward as forward;
we can learn in present formations of the earth’s crust the history of the
deposition of the most ancient strata; we read in a rounded granite pebble
the story of epochs, the fire that fused its organic or inorganic
particles, the water that rubbed and rolled it; we reconstruct from a few
bones the ancestry of obscure forms, and find in the fragments the missing
links that connect species now so varied. And the like method is applied
to man in his _tout ensemble_. His development is not arbitrary; what he
is is the expansion of germs of what he was.

Till these latter days he has, on the warrant of legends now of worth only
as witnesses to his crude ideas, presumed on an isolated place in
creation, and excepted his race from an inquiry made concerning every
creature beneath him. The pride of birth has hindered his admission of
lineal connection between the beliefs of cultured races and the beliefs of
savages, and pseudo-scientific writers still confuse issues by assuming
distinctions between races to whom spiritual truths have been revealed and
races from whom these truths have been withheld. But the only tenable
distinction to be drawn nowadays is between the scientific and
pre-scientific age in the history of any given race.

In these times, when many run to and fro, and knowledge is increased, we
forget how recent are the tremendous changes wrought by the science that--

                “Reaches forth her arms
  To feel from world to world, and charms
    Her secret from the latest moon.”

Dulled by familiarity, we forget how operative these changes are upon
opinions which have been--save now and again by voices speedily
silenced--unquestioned during centuries. It is, in truth, another world to
that in which our forefathers lived. Even in science itself the revolution
wrought by discoveries within the last fifty years is enormous. Our old
standard authorities, especially in astronomy and geology, are now of
value only as historical indices to the progress of those sciences, while
in the domain of life itself the distinctions between plant and animal,
assumed under the terms Botany and Zoology, are effaced and made one under
the term Biology. Sir James Paget, in a profoundly interesting address on
_Science and Theology_, has pointed out that it was once thought profane
to speak of life as in any kind of relation or alliance with chemical
affinities manifest in lifeless matter; now, the correlation of all the
forces of matter is a doctrine which investigation more and more confirms.
It was believed--many believe it still--that an impassable chasm separates
the inorganic from the organic, the latter being attained only through
operations of a “vital force” external to matter. That chasm is imaginary.
Even the supposed difference between plants and animals in the existence
in the latter of a stomach by which to digest and change nutritive
substances, vanishes before the experiments on carnivorous plants. And not
only do the observations of Mr. Darwin go far to show the existence of a
nervous system in plants, but examination of crystals shows that a “truly
elemental pathology must be studied in them after mechanical injuries or
other disturbing forces.” And is man, “the roof and crown of things,” to
witness to diversity amidst this unity?

If we hesitate to believe that our metaphysics have been evolved from
savage philosophy, that our accepted opinions concerning man’s nature and
destiny are but the improved and purified speculations of the past, we
must remember what long years had elapsed before the spirit of science
arose and breathed its air of freedom on the human mind. The Christian
religion wrought no change in the attitude of man towards the natural
world; it remained as full of mystery and miracle to the pagan after his
conversion as before it. When that religion was planted in foreign soil it
had, as the condition of its thriving, to be nourished by the alien
juices. It had to take into itself what it found there, and it found very
much in common. Although it displaced and degraded the _Dii majores_ of
other faiths, it had its own elaborated order of principalities and
powers; it had as real a belief in demons and goblins as any pagan; and it
was, therefore, simply a question of baptizing and rechristening the
ghost-world of heathendom, substituting angels for swan-maidens and elves,
devils for demons, and retaining unchanged the army of evil agencies, who
as witches and wraiths swarmed in the night and wrought havoc on soul and
body.

The doctrine of continuity admits no exceptions; it has no “favoured
nation” clause for man. Its teaching is of order, not confusion; of
gradual development, not spasmodic advance; of banishment of all
catastrophic theories in the interpretation of the history of man as of
nature. In its exposition nothing is “common or unclean;” nothing too
trivial for notice in study of the growth of language, of law, of social
customs and institutions, of religion, or of aught else comprised in the
story of our race. The nursery rhyme and the “wise saw” embody the serious
belief of past times; ceremonial rites and priestly vestments preserve the
significance and sacredness gathering round the common when it becomes
specialised. And in this belief in spiritual powers and agencies within
and without, the line uniting the lower and the higher culture is
unbroken. Nor can it be otherwise, if it be conceded that the sources of
man’s knowledge do not transcend his experience, and that within the
limits of this we have to look for the origin of all beliefs, from the
crudest animism to the most ennobling conceptions of the Eternal.

  “This world is the nurse of all we know,
   This world is the mother of all we feel.”

And yet we find this denied by professed scientists, whose minds are
built, as it were, in water-tight compartments. The theistic philosopher,
trembling at the bogey of human automatism, creates an Ego, “an entity
wherein man’s nobility essentially consists, which does not depend for its
existence on any play of physical or vital forces, but which makes these
forces subservient to its determinations.”[96] The biologist, shrinking
from the application of the theory of evolution to the descent of man,
argues that “his animality is distinct in nature from his rationality,
though inseparably joined during life in one common personality.” His body
“was derived from pre-existing materials, and therefore, only derivatively
created; that is, by the operation of secondary laws.” His soul, on the
other hand, was created in quite a different way, not by any pre-existing
means external to God Himself, but by the direct action of the Almighty
symbolised by the term “breathing.”[97] As this compound nature of man is
defended in a scientific treatise, the question that leaps to the lips is,
When did the inoculating action take place?--in the embryonic stage, or at
birth, or at the first awakenings of the moral sense?

Readers of that eccentric book, _The Unseen Universe_, published some
eight years ago, may remember that the authors built up a spiritual body
whose home lay beyond the visible cosmos.[98] Their argument was to the
following effect:--Just as light is held to result from vibrations of the
ether set in motion by self-luminous or light-reflecting bodies, so every
thought occasions molecular action in the brain, which gives rise to
vibrations of the ether. While the effect of a portion of our mental
activity is to leave a permanent record on the matter of the brain, and
thus constitute an organ of memory, the effect of the remaining portion is
to set up thought-waves across the ether, and to construct by these means,
in some part of the unseen universe, what may be called our “spiritual
body.” By this process there is being gradually built up, as the resultant
of our present activities, our future selves; and when we die our
consciousness is in some mysterious way transferred to the spiritual body,
and thus the continuity of identity is secured.

  “Eternal form shall still divide
   Th’ eternal soul from all beside.”

We may well quote the ancient words: “If they do these things in a green
tree, what shall be done in the dry?” The physicists, who thus locate the
soul in limitless space, and call it vibrations; the mathematician, who
said it must be extension; and the musician, who said, like Aristoxenus,
that it was harmony; the Cartesian philosopher, who locates it in the
pineal gland; the Costa Rican, who places it in the liver; the Tongans,
who make it co-extensive with the body; and the Swedenborgians, who assume
an underlying, inner self pervading the whole frame--these have met
together, the lower and the higher culture have kissed each other.

The tripartite division of man by the Rabbis, the Platonists, the
Paulinists, the Chinese, the mediæval theories of vegetal, sensitive, and
rational souls; what are these but the “other self” of savage philosophy
writ large? Plato’s number is found among the Sioux: of their three souls
one goes to a cold place, another to a warm place, and the third stays to
guard the body. Washington Matthews, in his _Ethnology and Philology of
the Hidatsa Indians_, says:--“It is believed by some of the Hidatsa that
every human being has four souls in one. They account for the phenomena of
gradual death, when the extremities are apparently dead while
consciousness remains, by supposing the four souls to depart, one after
another, at different times. When dissolution is complete, they say that
all the souls are gone, and have joined together again outside the body. I
have heard a Minsutaree quietly discussing this doctrine with an
Assinneboine, who believed in only one soul to each body.”

Let it not be thought that because science explains the earth-born origin
of some of man’s loftiest hopes, she makes claim to have spoken the last
word, and forbids utterance from any other quarter. The theologian is not
less free to assume such miraculous intervention in man’s development as
marks him nearer to the angel than to the ape, only his assumptions lie
beyond the scope of scientific inquiry. And it should be noted that whilst
science takes away, she gives with no niggard hand, so that the loss is
more seeming than real.

When belief in the earth’s central and supreme place in the universe was
surrendered at the bidding of astronomy, there was compensation in the
revelation of a universe to which thought can fix no limits. And if man
is bidden to surrender belief in his difference in kind from other living
creatures, he will be given the conception of a collective humanity whose
duties and destiny he shares. That conception will not be the destruction,
but the enlargement, of the field of the emotions, and, in contrasting the
evanescence of the individual with the permanence of the race, he may find
a profounder meaning in the familiar words--

  “We are such stuff as dreams are made on,
   And our little life is rounded with a sleep.”


§ XIII.

DREAMS AS OMENS AND MEDIA OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN GODS AND MEN.

Reference has now to be made to the part played by dreams as supposed
channels of communication between heaven and earth; as portents, omens,
etc. The common belief among the nations of antiquity that they were sent
by the gods, and the like belief lurking in the minds of the superstitious
to this day, are the scarcely-altered survivals of barbaric confusion
respecting them.

When man had advanced from the earlier stages of undefined wonder and
bewilderment concerning the powers around and above him to anthropomorphic
conceptions of them, _i.e._ to making them in his own image, the events of
his dreams were striking confirmation of his notions about the constant
intervention of spiritual beings, gods, chiefs, and ancestors, in the
affairs of life. That personal life and will with which the rude
intelligence invests the objects of its awe; waving trees, swirling
waters, drifting clouds, whirling winds, stately march of sun and star,
seemed especially manifest in dreams and visions. In their unrelated and
bewildering, or, on the other hand, their surpassingly clear, incidents,
the powers indwelling in all things seemed to come nearer than in the less
sensational occurrences of the day, uttering their monitions, or making
known their will. They were the media by which this and that thing was
commanded or forbidden, or by which guidance and counsel and knowledge of
the future were given. To induce them, therefore, became a constant
effort. The discovery that fasting is a certain method of procuring them
is one reason of its prevalence in the lower culture. Amongst all the
indigenous races of North America abstinence has been practised as a chief
means of securing supernatural inspiration. The Redskin, to become a
sorcerer or to secure a revelation from his _totem_, or the Eskimo, to
become _Angekok_, will endure the most severe privations.

It is believed that whatever is seen in the first dream thus produced by
fasting becomes the manitou, or guardian spirit of life, corresponding to
the “daimon” of Socrates. And whoever by much fasting is favoured with
dreams, and cultivates the art of explaining them as bearing on the
future, becomes the feared and consulted “medicine man” of his tribe. His
_kee-keé-wins_, or records, are finally shown to the old people, who meet
together and consult upon them. They in the end give their approval, and
declare that he is gifted as a prophet, is inspired with wisdom, and is
fit to lead in the councils of the people.[99]

Very slender data were needed for the conclusions first drawn from dreams;
let the death of a friend or foe be the incident, and the event happen;
let a hunting-path fill the half-torpid fancy, and a day’s fasting follow;
let the mother of a young sportsman dream that she saw a bear in a certain
place, and the son, guided by her account, find the bear where indicated,
and kill it; the arbitrary relation is set up forthwith. As Lord Bacon
says, “Men mark the hits, but not the misses,” and a thousand dreams
unfulfilled count as nothing against one dream fulfilled. Out of that is
shaped, as dream-lore shows, a canon of interpretation by which whole
races will explain their dreams, never staying, when experience happens to
confirm it, to wonder that the correspondences are not more frequent than
they are. Where the arbitrary act was wrought, the isolated or conflicting
influences manifest, there deity or demon was working. So the passage from
the crude interpretation of his dreams by the barbarian to the formal
elaboration of the dream-oracle is obvious. It was only one of many modes
by which the gods were thought to hold converse with man, and by which
their will was divined. It was one phase of that many-sided belief in
power for good or evil inhering in everything, and which led man to see
omens in the common events of life, in births, in the objects any one met
in a journey or saw in the sky; to divine the future by numbers, by the
lines in the hand, by the song and flight of birds (lurking in the word
_augury_), by the entrails of sacrificed men and animals.[100] Sometimes
the god sends the message through a spiritual being, an angel (literally
“messenger”); sometimes he, himself, speaks in vision, but more often
through the symbolism of both familiar and unfamiliar things. To interpret
this is a serious science, and skill and shrewdness applied therein with
success were passports to high place and royal favour. In this we have the
familiar illustrations of Joseph and Daniel, and, indeed, we need not
travel beyond the books of the Old Testament for abundant and varied
examples of the importance attached to dreams and visions, and of the
place accorded to dreams,[101] an importance undiminished until we come to
the literature of the centuries just before Christ. For example, in the
Book of Jesus the Son of Sirac, we read--

  “Vain and deceitful hopes befit the senseless man,
   And dreams make fools rejoice,
   Like one who grasps at a shadow and chases the wind,
   Is he who puts trust in dreams.”[102]

In the belief that through dreams and oracles Yahweh made known his will,
the influence of older beliefs and their literature is apparent. Among the
Accadians, a pre-Semitic race in Babylonia, there existed a mass of
treatises on magic and divination by dreams and visions, and both from
this and from Egyptian sources, blended with survivals from their barbaric
past, the Hebrews largely drew.

In this, too, “there is nothing new under the sun.” Homer, painting the
vividness and agonising incompleteness of the passing visions, affirms
that dreams from Jove proceed, although sometimes to deceive men; Plato
assigns prophetic character to the images seen in them; Aristotle sees a
divination concerning some things in dreams which is not incredible; the
answer to oracles was sought in them, as when the worshipper slept in a
temple on the skin of a sacrificed ram, and learned his destiny through
the dream that came. The Stoics argued that if the gods love and care for
men and are all-knowing, they will tell their purposes to men in sleep.
Cicero attaches high importance to the faculty of interpreting them; their
phenomena, like those of oracles and predictions, should, he contends, be
explained just as the grammarians and the commentators explain the
poets.[103]

With the influence of these beliefs in the air, and with the
legend-visions of Scripture as authority, the divine origin of dreams
became a doctrine of the Christian Church. Tertullian says that “we
receive dreams from God, there being no man so foolish as never to have
known any dreams come true,” and in his _De Anima_ reference is made to a
host of writers of dream treatises. For the most part they are but names;
their treatises have perished, but enough remains for the perusal of the
curious regarding ancient rules of interpretation and the particular
significance of certain dreams. The current views of dreams in classic
antiquity are believed to be partly embodied in the ’Ονειροκριτικα’ of
Artemidorus of Ephesus, who flourished about the middle of the second
century, and who reduces dream interpretation to a body of elaborate
rules, while amongst Christian writers Synesius of Cyrene, who lived two
centuries later, holds a corresponding place.

Both classic and patristic writers supply copious details concerning the
classes into which dreams were divided, and which have some curious
correspondences among the Oriental nations, as well as in our dream-lore,
_e.g._, when Artemidorus says that he who dreams he hath lost a tooth
shall lose a friend, we may compare with this a quotation which Brand
gives from the _Sapho and Phao_ of Lily, a playwright of the time of
Elizabeth. “Dreams have their trueth. Dreams are but dotings, which come
either by things we see in the day or meates that we eat, and so the
common-sense preferring it to be the imaginative. ‘I dreamed,’ says
Ismena, ‘mine eyetooth was loose, and that I thrust it out with my
tongue.’ ‘It foretelleth,’ replies Mileta, ‘the loss of a friend; and I
ever thought thee so full of prattle that thou wouldst thrust out the best
friend with thy tatling.’”

It is, however, needless to quote from Artemidorus and others of their
kin. They do but furnish samples of the ingenuity applied to profitless
speculations on matters which were fundamental then, and around which the
mind played unchecked and unchallenged. Moreover, the subtle distinctions
made between dreams in former times were slowly effaced, or sank to their
proper level in the gossip of chap books--our European _kee-keé-wins_. But
the belief in the dream as having a serious meaning, and in the spectral
appearances in visions as real existences, remained as strong as in any
barbarian or pagan. In an atmosphere charged with the supernatural,
apparitions and the like were matters of course, the particular form of
the illusion to which the senses testified being in harmony with the ideas
of the age. The devil does not appear to Greek or Roman, but he sorely
troubled the saints, unless their nerves were, like Luther’s, strong
enough to overmaster him. Luther speaks of him as coming into his cell,
and making a great noise behind the stove, and of his walking in the
cloister above his cell at night; “but as I knew it was the devil,” he
says, “I paid no attention to him, and went to sleep.” Sceptics now and
again arose protesting against the current belief, but they were as a
voice crying in the desert. One Henry Cornelius Agrippa, in the fifteenth
century, a man born out of due time, says, “To this delusion not a few
great philosophers have given not a little credit, especially Democritus,
Aristotle, Sincsius, etc., so far building on examples of dreams, which
some accident hath made to be true, that thence they endeavour to persuade
men that there are no dreams but what are real.”

His words have not yet lost their purport. For the credulity of man, the
persistence with which he clings to the shadow of the supernatural after
having surrendered the substance, seem almost a constant quantity, varying
only in form. Unteachable by experience, fools still pay their guineas to
mediums to rap out inane messages from the departed, and send postage
stamps to the Astronomer Royal, asking him to “work the planets” for them,
and secure them luck in love and law-suits. Nor is there any cure for this
but in wise culture of the mind, wise correction, and wholesome control of
the emotions. “By faithfully intending the mind to the realities of
nature,” as Bacon has it, and by living and working among men in a
healthy, sympathetic way, exaggeration of a particular line of thought or
feeling is prevented, and the balance of the faculties best preserved.
For, adds Dr. Maudsley, in pregnant and well-chosen words, “there are not
two worlds--a world of nature and a world of human nature--standing over
against one another in a sort of antagonism, but one world of nature, in
the orderly evolution of which human nature has its subordinate part.
Delusions and hallucinations may be described as discordant notes in the
grand harmony. It should, then, be every man’s steadfast aim, as a part of
nature--his patient work--to cultivate such entire sincerity of relations
with it; so to think, feel, and act always in intimate unison with it; to
be so completely one with it in life, that when the summons comes to
surrender his mortal part to absorption into it, he does so, not
fearfully, as to an enemy who has vanquished him, but trustfully, as to a
mother who, when the day’s task is done, bids him lie down to sleep.”




INDEX.


  Abipone, 15, 151, 156.

  Abraham, 135.

  Accadians, 134, 240.

  Æsop, 96.

  Agassiz, 208.

  Agni, 74.

  Agrippa, Cornelius, 243.

  Ahriman, 54.

  Alger, 208.

  Algonquins, 40, 43, 46, 91, 99, 110, 125, 167, 184, 203, 211, 216.

  Allah, 159.

  Ancestors, sun and moon as, 19.
    worship of, 110, 112, 214.

  Ancient Stone Age, 8.

  Animal, descent from, 99.
    worship, 110.

  Animals, transformation into, 81.
    virtue in flesh of, 164.
    souls in, 207.

  Apollo, 52.

  Arabian folk-tales, 196.
    notion of soul, 202.

  Araucanians, 43, 163.

  Arnobius, 167.

  Arnold, Matthew, 14, 227.

  Art, primitive, 147.

  Artemidorus, 241.

  Arthur, King, 123.

  Aryan epics, 71.

  Aryan folk-tales, 70, 95.
    languages, 67.
    myths, 51, 76.

  Aryans, primitive home of, 69.

  Astrology, 33.

  Australians, 20, 26, 30, 99, 103, 150, 153, 157, 165, 179, 198, 205.

  Aztecs, 44, 199, 210.


  Barbaric belief in dreams, 168-174.
    belief in souls in brutes, etc., 207-213.
    belief in virtue in lifeless things, 12, 160-168, 181.
    confusion about names, 154-159.
    cures for disease, 179.
    dread of portrait-taking, 162.
    language, 150.
    notions of soul’s abode, 215-222.
    theory of disease, 174, 182.
    theory of a soul, 182-187.
    theory of soul’s nature, 198-206.

  Baring Gould, 28, 84.

  Basutos, 184.

  Beast-fables, 94, 98.

  Beowulf, 52.

  Berserkr, 87.

  Bifröst, 33.

  Bird, soul as, 210.
    wind as, 43-45.

  Body, soul apart from, 188.
    soul as replica of, 205.

  Bohemian folk-tale, 195.

  Bonaparte, 64.

  Brain of man and ape, 144.

  Brand, 17, 166, 241.

  Brazilian Indians, 153, 156, 175.

  Breath, soul as, 187, 198 ff.

  Brébeuf, 165.

  Brinton, 45, 92, 101, 210.

  Brutes, souls in, 207.

  Bryant, 7.

  Buckle, 3.

  Buddha, 64.

  Buddhist fables (_see_ Jâtakas).

  Bunsen, 132.

  Bushmen, 13, 20, 26.


  Cæsar, 106.

  Callaway, Bishop, 170.

  Campbell, J. F., 193.

  Cannibalism, 165.

  Cardinal points, symbol of, 44.

  Caribs, 167.

  Carpenter, Dr., 88, 232.

  Catlin, 162.

  Charlemagne, 125.

  Charles’s Wain, 30.

  Charms, philosophy of, 164.

  Chasuble, 167.

  Chaucer, 28, 32.

  Child and savage, 14.

  Chimpanzee, brain of, 145.

  Chinese myth, 16, 36.

  Choctaws, 42, 184.

  Christian heaven, 220.
    religion, 231.

  Cicero, 240.

  Civilised theories of soul’s nature, 198, 203.

  Clan-totems, 107, 109.

  Cloud-serpent, 46.

  Clouds as cows, 51.

  Confession, 181.

  Congo Negroes, 202.

  Continuity, doctrine of, 228, 231.

  Coral, 166.

  Costa Ricans, 216, 234.

  Counting, savage, 153.

  Cox, Sir G. W., 37, 62, 75, 198.

  Crest, totem as, 108.

  Cronus, 35, 37.

  Cross as wind symbol, 44.

  _Custom and Myth_, 38.


  Dakotas, 31, 46, 106, 175, 199, 213.

  Dammaras, 151.

  Darwin, 3, 230.

  Dasent, 91, 121.

  Dead, burial of food with, 212.
    road of the, 32.

  Death, savage notion of, 186.

  Demons, 58, 178.

  Dennys, 15.

  Deodand, 15.

  Devil, 53, 56, 60.
    as disease-bringer, 176.

  Disease, savage theory of, 89, 174 ff.
    savage remedies for, 179.

  Doctrine of signatures, 166.

  Dorman, 42, 157, 209.

  Dragons, battles with, 52.

  Dreams as source of belief in soul, 183, 225.

  Dreams, duality in, 183.
    savage belief in reality of, 168-174.
    omens from, 236-242.

  Dyaks, 17, 25, 159, 171.

  Dyaus, 36, 74.


  Earth as source of heaven-theories, 219.

  Earth-bearers, 40.

  Echo, soul as, 185.

  _Edda_, 15, 29, 33, 43, 52.

  Effigy, burning in, 16.

  Egg, world as, 38.

  Ego, the, 232.

  Egyptian folk-tale, 197.

  Epics, Aryan, 71.

  Epidemic delusions, 88.

  Eskimos, 30, 91, 153, 163, 179, 199, 217, 237.

  Esthonian myth, 39.

  Euhêmeros, 66.

  Eumenidês, 159.

  Evolution, 144.
    of mind, 5, 228.

  Exile, Jewish, 134.

  Exogamy, 104.

  Eye-bright, 15, 166.


  Fasting, 237.

  Fijians, 171, 177, 184, 211.

  Fingers in counting, 153.

  Finnish myth, 16, 32, 38, 43, 45, 121, 176, 196, 219.

  Finns, 159, 173.

  Fire myths, 47.

  Food, forbidden, 105.

  Foster, Thomas, 63.

  Frisian moon myth, 28.


  Gaea, 35.

  Galton, 151.

  Gellert myth, 128.

  Gender, origin of, 22.

  _Gesta Romanorum_, 128.

  Giant with no heart in his body, 192.

  Gill, W. W., 20, 47, 177.

  Gladstone, W. E., 7.

  Gods, revelation from, through dreams, 239.

  Goldziher, 62, 64, 135.

  Greek myth, 33, 77.
    notion of soul, 202.

  Greenlanders, 27, 164, 171, 201, 212.

  Grimm, 27, 30, 32, 55, 97, 178, 181, 201, 209, 210.

  Grimm’s Law, 73.

  Grote, 14.


  Hades, 220.

  Hall, Bishop, 18.

  Heaven, 19.
    imagery of, 221.
    and earth, myths of, 34.

  Hebrew myth, 33, 39, 64, 131-136.
    notion of soul, 206.

  Hell, 220.

  Heraklês, 22, 31, 51, 63, 136.

  Hêrê, 31.

  Hiawatha, 158.

  Hidatsa Indians, 235.

  History, myth in, 114.

  _Hitopadesa_, 129.

  Holmes, 183.

  Homer, 240.

  Hottentot, 217.

  Huc, Father, 181.

  Hurricane, 199.

  Huxley, 145, 228.


  Icelandic moon myth, 28.

  Iliad, 55, 64, 205.

  Ilmarine, 39.

  Im Thurn, 156, 171, 207.

  Inanimate things, criminality of, 15.
    sex in, 24.
    souls in, 211.

  Incas, 45.

  _Indian Fairy Tales_, 191.

  Indians, Columbian, 155.
    Housatonic, 31.
    North American, 13, 17, 21, 26, 30, 151, 156, 162, 164, 175, 199, 207,
        212, 216, 219, 235, 237.
    of Guiana, 156, 171.
    Selish, 27.
    Western, 46, 107.

  Indra, 49, 53.

  Iroquois, 156, 165, 167.

  Isaac, 135.

  Islam, 33.


  Jack and Jill, 28.

  Japanese myth, 40.

  Jâtakas, 27, 96, 129, 192.

  Jehovah, 159.

  Johnson, Dr., 183.

  Jonah, 136.


  Kaffirs, 13, 164.

  _Kalevala_, 38.

  _Kalevipöeg_, 39.

  Kane, Dr., 155.

  Kasirs, 30.

  Kenaima, 175.

  Khasias moon myth, 27.

  Kinship, primitive, 102.

  Kirby, 196.

  Kuhn, 41.


  Lancashire folk-lore, 177, 204.

  Lang, Andrew, 37, 166, 205.

  Lang, Dr., 157.

  Language, personification of, 24.
    physical base of, 150.
    primitive, 149.

  Languages, savage, 23.
    limitations of, 150.

  Lapps, 156, 159, 201.

  Leland, 44.

  Lightning myths, 47.

  Lithuanian, 32.

  Living and not living, savage confusion between, 12, 160-168, 181.

  Llewellyn myth, 128.

  Lucretius, 169.

  Luther, 242.

  Lycanthropy, 83.

  Lyell, 145.


  Malays, 150.

  Man, mental development of, 147, 228.
    primitive interpretation of nature by, 10.
    relation of, to nature, 4, 228.
    savage and civilised, 144.

  Manacicas, 20.

  _Manes_, 212.

  Maoris, 34.

  Mapuches, 180.

  Marriage, primitive, 103.

  Maruts, 44, 53.

  Matthews, Washington, 235.

  Maudsley, Dr., 243.

  Maui, sun-catcher, 21.
    fire-bringer, 47.

  M’Lennan, 102, 104.

  Medicine-men, 92, 99, 237.

  Melanesian, 166.

  Men-beasts, 86.

  Metamorphosis, 81.

  Metempsychosis, 82.

  Mexicans, 212.

  Milky Way, 31, 222.

  Mind, evolution of, 5, 228.

  Mivart, 233.

  Mohawk, 199.

  Mohicans, 150.

  Mongolian moon myth, 27.

  Mongols, 150.

  Moon, as mother, 25.
    as sun’s sister, 26.
    man in the, 28.
    myths, 10, 19, 20.
    patches, 27.

  Moquis, 99, 102, 110.

  Müller, Max, 37, 49, 56, 62, 66, 68, 111, 158.

  Multiple souls, 234.

  Myth in history, 114.
    origin of, 17.
    primitive meaning of, 3, 10.
    serious meaning in, 7.
    solar theory of, 61-81.
    value of study of, 138.

  Myths of Creation, 38.
    earth-bearers, 40.
    fire-stealers, 47.
    heaven and earth, 34.
    lightning, 47.
    Milky Way, 31.
    moon, 20, 27.
    Northern Lights, 31.
    rainbow, 32, 33.
    stars, 30.
    sun, 19, 21.
    swallowing, 36.
    wind, 42-45.


  Names, savage dread of, 104.
    savage confusion about, 154-159.

  Napoleon III., will of, 113.

  New Zealanders, 13, 15, 30, 158, 164.

  Niebuhr, 65.

  Nightmare, 171.

  Non-Aryan, brain of, 144.
    races, languages of, 201.

  _Norse, Tales from the_, 192.

  Northern Lights, 31.


  Odin, 30, 44, 202.

  Ogres, 44.

  Ojibways, 42, 110, 155, 209, 212, 217.

  _Old Deccan Days_, 188.

  Omens, dreams as, 236-242.

  Oracles, 240.

  Origin of gender, 22.
    moon, 20.
    myth, 7.
    religion, 111.
    sun, 19.

  Orion, 30.

  Ormuzd, 54.

  Other self, barbaric theory of, 183.
    conceived as breath, 187, 199.
    passage from within to without, 185.

  Ottawas, 31.

  Ouranos, 74.

  Ovid, 85.


  Paget, Sir J., 230.

  _Panchatantra_, 129.

  Papa, 19, 34.

  Papuan, brain of, 145.

  Patagonians, 31.

  Persians, 25, 33, 57.

  Picture-writing, 107.

  Plant, descent from, 99.

  Plants, souls in, 208.

  Pleiades, 30.

  Pocahontas, 158.

  Polynesians, 38, 163.

  Prithivî, 36.

  Prytaneum, 15.

  Psychical Research, Society of, 217.

  Punchkin, 188 ff.


  Quiches, 42, 199.


  Ra, 21.

  Rae, Dr., 153.

  Rain, gender in, 25.

  Rainbow, 32.

  Ralston, 194.

  Rangi, 34.

  Religion, origin of, 111.

  Rénan, 132.

  Réville, 214.

  Reynard the fox, 97, 181.

  _Rig-Veda_, 44, 49, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80.

  Rink, Dr., 165.

  Road of the dead, 32.

  Roman notion of soul, 202.

  Rossetti, 17, 202.

  _Russian Folk-Tales_, 194.


  St. George, 53.

  Saliva, virtue in, 16, 163.

  Samoan moon myth, 27.

  Samoyed folk-tale, 196.

  Samson, myth of, 137.

  San Graal, 126.

  Sanskrit, 72.

  Satan, 57.

  Savage and civilised man, 144.
    belief in dreams, 168-174.
    confusion between living and not living, 13, 160-168.
    confusion between names and things, 105, 155.
    cures for disease, 179.
    interpretation of nature, 10.
    languages, 23, 150.
    mode of counting, 152.
    theory of disease, 89, 174-182.
    theory of soul, 182-187.
    theory of soul’s abode, 215-222.
    theory of soul’s nature, 198-207.

  Science, progress of, 230.

  Seminoles, 203.

  Semitic languages, 159.
    myth, 132.

  Senses, illusions of the, 39, 226.

  Servian folk-tale, 195.

  Shadow, soul as, 184.

  Shawnee name myth, 157.

  Sheol, 206, 220.

  Sioux, 47, 162.

  Skulls, capacity of, 145.

  Slavonic sun myth, 26.

  Sleeping heroes, 124.

  Smith, Adam, 151.

  Sneezing, 177.

  Society Islanders, 150.

  Solar theory of myth, 61-81.

  Sonora Indians, 185.

  Sorcerers, 163.

  Soul, absence in disease, 178.
    absence in dreams, 171.
    as breath, 187, 199 ff.
    as shadow, etc., 184.
    barbaric theory of, 182-187, 225, 234.
    dwelling-place of, 215-222.
    in brutes, plants, etc., 207.
    occupation of, 216.
    tales of, apart from body, 188 ff.
    theories of nature of, 198-207, 234.
    transfer of, 203.
    weight of, 207.

  South Sea Islanders, 158, 163, 185.

  Spencer, Herbert, 110, 149, 183, 214.

  Spirit as breath, 200.

  Spirits, offerings to, 213 (see also Soul).

  Star myths, 30.

  Stars as persons, 20, 25.

  Storm-gods, 44.

  Sun as ancestor, 19, 20.
    as father, 25.
    capture of, 21.
    myths, 10, 19, 51.

  Swedenborgians, 234.

  Swift, Dean, 73, 166.


  Taboo of names, 158.

  Tacitus, 16, 106.

  Tahitians, 158.

  Tákahlis, 203.

  _Talmud_, 178.

  Tasmanians, 150.

  Tatar folk-tale, 196.

  Tell myth, 116 ff.

  Tertullian, 241.

  Thor, 46, 52, 60.

  Thunder-bird, 46.

  To be, the verb, 151.

  Tools, primitive, 147.

  Toothache, 175, 179.

  Totemism, 99, 102, 237.

  Totems as badge, 107.
    as crest, 108.
    Red Indian, 100.
    worship of, 110.

  Tongans, 19, 201, 234.

  Tonkanays, 92.

  Transformation, 85, 91.

  Treacle, 16.

  Tree, criminality of, 15.

  Trees, soul in, 209.

  Trench, Archbishop, 137.

  Troyes, Courts of, 15.

  Tylor, 14, 25, 65, 165, 199, 202, 205, 207.

  Tyrolese, 164.


  Underworld, 220.

  _Unseen Universe_, 233.

  Uranus, 35.


  Varuna, 74.

  Vatea, 19.

  _Vatnsdæla Saga_, 173.

  _Veda_ (see _Rig-Veda_).

  _Vinaya Pitaka_, 129.

  Vritra, 49, 53, 60.


  Waitz, 205.

  Wandering Jew, 31.

  Water between earth and heaven, 219.

  Watling Street, 32.

  Werewolves, 84, 86, 91.

  West, soul abode in, 219.

  Whitney, 151.

  Wind, myths of, 42-45.
    soul as, 199.

  Witchcraft, 58.

  Witches, 83, 91.

  World as egg, 38.

  Worship of ancestors, 110, 214.


  Xomanes, 167.


  Yahweh, 55, 57, 159.


  _Zend-Avesta_, 54.

  Zeus, 33, 36, 55, 74, 85.

  Zoroaster, 56.

  Zulu, 170, 184.


THE END.


_Printed by_ R. &amp; R. CLARK, _Edinburgh_.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] Buckle’s work appeared in 1857, Darwin’s in 1859.

[2] Matthew Arnold, _Empedocles on Etna_.

[3] Countess Cesaresco’s _Essays in the Study of Folk-Songs_, p. 183.

[4] _The Folk-Lore of China_, p. 52.

[5] Mark vii. 33, John ix. 6. Cf. Tacitus, _Hist._ iv. 81--“A certain man
of the Alexandrian populace afflicted with wasted eyes kept imploring the
prince to deign to spatter saliva on his cheek and eyeballs.” In Finnish
myth the demon Hiisi forms a huge snake from the spittle of a
fellow-demon. Cf. also Thomson’s _Masai Land_, pp. 288-290.

[6] Henderson’s _Folk-Lore of the Northern Counties_, p. 229; cf. Horace,
_Sat._ i. 8, 30; Frazer’s _Golden Bough_, i. 9; Scot’s _Discoverie of
Witchcraft_, p. 208.

[7] Grimm, _T. M._, 356, 357.

[8] II. 427.

[9] Page xvi.

[10] _Custom and Myth_, pp. 49, 50. While these sheets are passing through
the press I am glad to take occasion to commend Mr. Lang’s scholarly and
fascinating book to the reader. As an explanation of the survival of crude
and irrational elements in the myths of civilised races, it is a book to
be reckoned with by the advocates of the solar theory.

[11] “And said the gods, let there be a hammered plate in the midst of the
waters, and let it be dividing between waters and waters.” Gen. i. 6. The
verb from which the substantive is derived signifies, among other
meanings, “to beat out into thin plates.”

[12] Gen. viii. 2.

[13] Gen. xxviii. 17.

[14] Ezek. i. 1.

[15] _Modern Painters_, iii. 154.

[16] Dorman’s _Primitive Superstitions_, p. 350.

[17] Leland’s _Algonquin Legends_, pp. 111, 204.

[18] From Sans. _mar_, to “grind.” Ares and Mars come from the same root.

[19] _Merry Wives of Windsor_, act iv. sc. 4.

[20] In Finnish myth the dwarfs punish with pimples and ringworm those who
enter new houses without bowing to the four corners.

[21] Both “pecuniary” and “fee” are, as established by Grimm’s law, from
_pecu_. Latin _pecu-a_, pl. _pecus_, “cattle”; Sanskrit _paçu_, “cattle,”
from _pac_, to fasten (that which is tied up, _i.e._ domestic cattle). Cf.
Skeats’ _Etymol. Dict._ _in loc._ A.S. _feoh_ is cognate with German
_vich_, and the ideas these express occur in _ktēma_, the Greek word for
“property,” which Grimm derives from the verb _keto_, “to feed cattle.”

[22] Not the same as the Greek Heraklês. The similarity of name led the
Romans to identify their Hercules, who was a god of boundaries, like
Jupiter Terminus, with the Greek hero. _Cacus_ is not cognate with Greek
_kakos_, bad, but was originally _Cæcius_, the “blinder” or “darkener.”

[23] _Decline and Fall_, iii. 171; Emerson’s _English Traits_, p. 123.

[24] See Ralston’s _Russian Folk-Tales_, p. 347, for similar Bulgarian
legend about St. George.

[25] Haug’s _Essays on the Parsis_, tr. Vendidâd, pp. 225 ff.

[26] Cf. Isaiah xlv. 7, 1 Kings xxii. 21-23, Amos iii. 6.

[27] _Iliad_, Book xxiv. 663 ff., and cf. Lang’s tr., p. 494.

[28] _Vide_ my _Jesus of Nazareth_, p. 144.

[29] Notably _Tobit_ and _Baruch_, and cf. _Book of Wisdom_, ii. 24, for
earliest indications of the belief. The Asmodeus of _Tobit_, iii. 8 and
17, appears to be the Aeshmô dâevô of the Zend-Avesta.

[30] Exodus xxii. 18.

[31] For details of witch trials in this island cf. Mrs. Lynn Linton’s
_Witch Stories_, passim.

[32] _Knowledge Library._

[33] Vide _Chips_, ii. 1-146.

[34] Cf. Professor Keane’s Appendix to Sir A. C. Ramsay’s _Europe_, p. 557

[35] Cf. “Little Saddlehurst” in Mr. Geldart’s _Folk-Lore of Modern
Greece_, p. 27.

[36] Cf. on this matter Whitney’s _Oriental and Linguistic Studies_, p.
203.

[37] _Mythology of the Aryan Nations_, i. 108.

[38] _Mental Physiology_, p. 315.

[39] Spenser says--

  “Such, men do _changelings_ call, so changed by fairies’ theft.”

[40] An Algonquin legend begins: “In old times, in the beginning of
things, men were as animals and animals as men; how this was, no one
knows.”--Leland’s _Algonquin Legends_, p. 31.

[41] And cf. Bourke’s _Snake Dance of the Moquis_, passim.

[42] Cf. Mahaffy’s _Prolegomena to Ancient History_, p. 392.

[43] Vol. i., Trübner and Co. See for some valuable illustrations from
early English and other sources an article by Rev. Dr. Morris, in
_Contemp. Rev._, May 1881, and the _Folk-Lore Journal_, 1884-85, for
translations of Jâtakas, also by Dr. Morris.

[44] _Travels in N.W. and W. Australia_, ii. 229.

[45] Bourke’s _Snake Dance of the Moquis_, p. 136.

[46] Cf. Art. “Family,” _Encyclopædia Britannica_.

[47] _De Bell. Gall._, v. c. 12.

[48] _Elton’s Origins of English History_, p. 297.

[49] _Germania_, ix. 10.

[50] _Principles of Sociology_, p. 413.

[51] _Edinburgh Review_, Jan. 1869, p. 134. Article on Rilliet’s “Origines
de la Confédération Suisse: Histoire et Légende.”

[52] _Times’_ telegram from Geneva, June 25, 1883.

[53] Book x. p. 166. Cf. Baring Gould’s _Curious Myths_, p. 117, and
Fiske’s _Myths and Myth-makers_, p. 4.

[54] Baring Gould, p. 119.

[55] Cf. Prof. Rhys’s _Arthurian Legend_, _passim_.

[56] _Academy_, Nov. 17, 1877, p. 472.

[57] _Mythology among the Hebrews, and its Historical Development_
(London: Longmans), 1877.

[58] _Goldziher_, p. 392 ff.

[59] _Ibid._, p. 103.

[60] The following paragraph from Professor Huxley’s _Observations on the
Human Skulls of Engis and Neanderthal_ is extracted from Lyell’s
_Antiquity of Man_, p. 89 (4th edition).

“The most capacious healthy European skull yet measured had a capacity of
114 cubic inches, the smallest (as estimated by weight of brain) about 55
cubic inches, while, according to Professor Schaaffhausen, some Hindu
skulls have as small a capacity as about 46 cubic inches (27 oz. of
water). The largest cranium of any gorilla yet measured contained 34.5
cubic inches.”

Commenting on this paper Sir Charles Lyell remarks that “it is admitted
that the differences in character between the brain of the highest races
of man and that of the lowest, though less in degree, are of the same
order as those which separate the human from the Simian brain,” and that
the statements of both Professor Huxley and Dr. Morton show “that the
range of size or capacity between the highest and lowest human brain is
greater than that between the highest Simian and the lowest human brain.”

[61] Spencer’s _Principles of Sociology_, p. 147.

[62] The peculiar feature of the Semitic languages is that the consonants
are everything and the vowels nothing, every word consisting, in the first
instance, merely of three consonants, which form, so to speak, the soul of
the idea to be expressed by that word. And as in ancient times the
consonants only were written, the name Jehovah appeared as JHVH. Its exact
pronunciation is utterly lost, and such veneration gathered round it, that
when the Jews came to it they substituted some other name--usually Adonai.
Afterwards, when vowels were added to the Hebrew text, those in Adonai, or
its phonetic form Edona, were inserted between the letters of the sacred
name, and thus JHVH was written Jehovah.

[63] Rink’s _Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo_, p. 45.

[64] Vide _Custom and Myth_; Art. “Moly and Mandragora,” p. 146.

[65] _Popular Antiquities_, ii. 85.

[66] Dyers _Folk-Lore_, p. 179.

[67] Arnobius _adv. Gentes._, v. 19.

[68] _De rerum Natura_, Book iv. 453-468.

[69] According to Professor Skeat, from A.S. _niht_, night; _mara_, lit.
“a crusher,” from Aryan root, MAR, to crush. Cf. _Etymol. Dict._

[70] _Among the Indians of Guiana_, pp. 344-346.

[71] W. G. Black: _Folk-Medicine_, p. 13.

[72] _Teut. Mythol._, 1165.

[73] Cf. Grimm, _Teut. Mythol._ 1177.

[74] “Voilà autant de rapports que les Bouddhistes ont avec nous,” adds
the traveller, for hinting at which analogies between Buddhists and
Catholics the Pope put his book on the Index.

[75] In a Finnish legend, which is the subject of Southey’s “Donica,” a
maiden of that name moves about seemingly alive after her death in virtue
of a parchment as magic spell, which is fastened to her wrist, until a
sorcerer finds out the secret of the connection and unfastens the
parchment, when the counterfeit life departs.

[76] _Mythology of the Aryan Nations_, i. 140.

[77] Brinton’s _Myths of the New World_, p. 51 (second edition).

[78] I am indebted to the Rev. Richard Morris for this reference.

[79] Jacob Grimm remarks that whilst the more palpable breath, as spirit,
is masculine, the living, life-giving soul is treated as a delicate
feminine essence. _Soul_ is the Icelandic _sála_, German _seele_, Gothic
_saiwala_, akin to _saivs_, which means “the sea.” _Saivs_ is from a root,
_si_, or _siv_, the Greek _seio_, to shake, and this choice of the word
_saivala_ may indicate that the ancient Teutons conceived of the soul “as
a sea within, heaving up and down with every breath, and reflecting heaven
and earth on the mirror of the deep.”--_T. M._ p. 826.

[80] _Prim. Culture_, i. 412.

[81] _Brinton_, p. 271.

[82] _Iliad_, xxiii. 103 (trans. Lang and others).

[83] Cf. Lecky’s _History of Rationalism_, i. 340.

[84] _Prim. Culture_, i. 411. See _Soul Shapes_ (Fisher Unwin, 1890).

[85] “To the ear of the savage, animals certainly seem even to talk. This
fact is universally evident, and ought to be fully realised.”--Im Thurn’s
_Guiana_, p. 351.

[86] _Dorman_, pp. 287, 288.

[87] Grimm’s _Teutonic Mythology_, p. 827.

[88] Cox and Jones, _Popular Romances_, p. 139.

[89] _Brinton_, p. 107.

[90] Cf. _Ante_, pp. 110-114.

[91] More correctly, “that engenders it.”

[92] _Hibbert Lectures_, 1884, pp. 39, 40.

[93] The Society’s advertisement is as follows:--

“THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE, APPARITIONS, etc.--The Society for Psychical
Research will be grateful for any good evidence bearing on such phenomena
as thought-reading, clairvoyance, presentiments, and dreams, noted at the
time of occurrence and afterwards confirmed; unexplained disturbances in
places supposed to be haunted; apparitions at the moment of death or
otherwise; and of such other abnormal events as may seem to fall under
somewhat the same categories. Communications to be addressed to E. Gurney,
14 Dean’s Yard, S.W.; or to F. W. H. Myers, Leckhampton House, Cambridge.
Applications for information or for membership to be addressed to the
Secretary, at the Society’s Offices, 14 Dean’s Yard, S.W.”

[94] Matthew Arnold, _Empedocles on Etna_.

[95] _Hume_, p. 50.

[96] Dr. Carpenter’s _Mental Physiology_, p. 27.

[97] St. Geo. Mivart’s _Genesis of Species_, p. 325. In the second edition
of this work Professor Mivart cites with satisfaction the authority of S.
Thomas Aquinas and of Cardinal Newman on the matter!

[98] For criticism of this pseudo-scientific theory see Professor
Clifford’s brilliant paper in _Lectures and Essays_, i. 228, ff.; and a
review of “The Unseen Universe” by the present writer, _Fraser’s Mag._,
Jan. 1876.

[99] The following Mohammadan recipe for summoning spirits is given in
Klunzinger’s _Upper Egypt_. “Fast seven days in a lonely place, and take
incense with you, such as benzoin, aloeswood, mastic, and odoriferous wood
from Soudan, and read the chapter 1001 times (from the Koran) in the seven
days--a certain number of readings, namely, for every day one of the five
daily prayers. That is the secret, and you will see indescribable wonders;
drums will be beaten beside you, and flags hoisted over your head, and you
will see spirits full of light and of beautiful and benign aspect.”--(P.
386).

[100] In Roget’s _Thesaurus_, sect. 511, a curious and instructive list of
terms expressive of the different forms of divination is given.

[101] Numb. xii. 6; 1 Sam. xxviii. 6, 15, etc.

[102] Chap. xxxiv.

[103] Cf. _Ency. Brit._, Art. “Dreams.”






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Myths and Dreams, by Edward Clodd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MYTHS AND DREAMS ***

***** This file should be named 43813-0.txt or 43813-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/3/8/1/43813/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
