The Project Gutenberg eBook, P. T. Barnum's Menagerie, by P. T. Barnum and
Sarah J. Burke


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: P. T. Barnum's Menagerie


Author: P. T. Barnum and Sarah J. Burke



Release Date: March 10, 2014  [eBook #45108]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK P. T. BARNUM'S MENAGERIE***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Emmy, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original lovely illustrations.
      See 45108-h.htm or 45108-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45108/45108-h/45108-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45108/45108-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/ptbarnumsmenager00barn





[Illustration: P. T. BARNUM'S MENAGERIE]

The Publishers take pleasure in acknowledging the courtesy and aid
extended them by the Strobridge Lithographing Co.


P.T. BARNUM'S MENAGERIE

Text and Illustrations Arranged for Little People by

P· T· BARNUM

and

SARAH J· BURKE

[Illustration]







New York &amp; London
White &amp; Allen

Copyright, 1888, by White &amp; Allen.

Lith. By G. H. Buek &amp; Co. N. Y.



[Illustration]




WITH THE ANIMALS.


My dear children, unless you have been fortunate enough to be taken to
the menagerie by some grown-up friend, somebody who would patiently
answer all your questions, and tell you all about the bewitchingly
horrible animals in the cages, and into whose arms you might run when
they growled and looked fierce, I do not think you can know the joy of
Tom, Trixie and Gay as they entered the menagerie with Mr. Barnum.

Trixie hugged his right arm tight, as usual, Gay kept fast hold of his
left hand, while Tom was so anxious to miss no part of the show that
he did not know that he was walking so clumsily as to put Mr. Barnum's
toes in danger; and, notwithstanding they were such old chums, I fancy
he was more than once tempted to say to the boy, "Tom, you are as
awkward as a grizzly bear!"

[Illustration]

At the sight of the zebra, Gay laughed aloud. "He is knitted all in
stripes--he is made of garters!" she said; and she thought the gnu
looked like a wild bull "in front," but when he turned round she said
he was a horse.

And oh! you should have heard the buffalo snort at Gay! "He wants
to make a meal of baby," said Tom, but the truth was a man had been
teasing him with a cane, and when a buffalo is angry, he is not a very
pleasant play-fellow.

"I mean to hunt the buffalo, out West, when I am a man," said Tom.

"Then you must hurry and grow up," said Mr. Barnum, "for the animal, in
our own country, is being rapidly exterminated."

"What is the meaning of exterminated?" asked Tom.

[Illustration]

"Killed off," said Mr. Barnum; and Tom thought that a much better way
of saying it.

"Does a buffalo grow up out of a buffalo bug?" asked Gay. Then they all
laughed at her till she pouted, and Trixie thought, "I must remember to
tell that to mama."

The reindeer, the antelope, and the moose were all somewhat
alike--"cousins," the children called them; and Gay had a very pretty
name for two reindeer that she thought especially beautiful--she said
they were "Santa Claus's ponies;" and I am sure that even Santa Claus
would have been delighted to drive them.

Elephants! Just what Tom had been longing for, and it was strange to
see how frisky the great clumsy creatures could be. They stood on one
another's backs, they tried to waltz, and then two of them, after much
floundering and capering, jumped over a bar; but not even Mr. Barnum
himself could say they did it gracefully.

"See those two play see-saw!" cried Trixie, laughing till her little
sides shook, "and that little fellow is grinding a hand-organ!"

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Others, dressed like clowns, were as full of tricks as so many monkeys.
The very largest elephant thrust his trunk forward, and Tom whispered
to a boy who stood near, "You pull his front tail, and hear him roar!"
But the elephant rolled his eyes toward Tom as if to say, "Better
try it yourself, young man," and Tom moved back.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

"Mr. Barnum and I remember Jumbo," said he.

"Who was Jumbo?" asked Trixie.

"Oh, a tremendous elephant, as big as six of these rolled into one! He
went to Canada, and there a locomotive smashed into his brain, and he
turned over and died. But first he wrapped his trunk around the baby
elephant and flung him safe off the track."

"Good Jumbo!" said Gay with a smile; but there were tears in Trixie's
eyes.

"Yes, baby; and that's the way we would jump for you in any danger,"
added Tom.

Gay smiled sweetly again, but Trixie squeezed her old friend's hand
so hard that he bent down and kissed her, saying, "But there _is_ no
danger, Toodles!"

[Illustration]

The children were now quite ready to leave the elephants to look at
the ostriches and the storks. I think that Trixie expected to see the
ostriches wholly covered with long, dangling feathers, such as those
she wore on her hat; and she was a little disappointed. The storks were
old friends of hers, because mama had a screen at home, upon which
storks were embroidered; and some of these birds, like those on the
screen, were resting upon one foot.

Tom was very much interested in the sea birds,--the albatross, the
penguin, and the auk, but there was such a crowd around their cage that
he came away grumbling.

"Never mind, Tom," said Mr. Barnum: "come and see the fisherman that
carries his basket under his chin!"

Tom did not understand this joke at first, but Mr. Barnum explained
that he meant the pelican, which has a pouch under its beak in which it
carries home the fish to feed its young.

[Illustration]

"Look out, Trixie!" cried Tom, when they saw the whale. "He swallowed a
man once."

"Did this _very whale_ swallow a man?" asked Trixie, solemnly; "and did
you _know_ the man?"

"Well, no--not exactly; but I knew _of_ him."

"What was his name?"

"Jonah."

"O, Tom Van Tassel! That was as much as fifty years ago, and Jonah
was a bible man. The whale looks kind and I'm not afraid of him," and
Trixie went up very close. "But what makes him so floppy? I should
think the whalebones in him would stiffen him."

And then Mr. Barnum explained that what we call whalebone is something
that grows in the mouth of a whale, and is used as a strainer, to
separate the water from the food.

They thought the shark a mean-looking creature, and they were surprised
to learn that it turns on its back to bite.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

"I'm tired of fish--let us find something furious!" said Tom; so they
started toward the lion's cage. The great, grand king of them all was
taking his afternoon rest, and he opened his eyes and looked at them
once, as if to say, "Behold and admire! I am the King of Beasts, and
you are only little human Yankees! I had these bars put up to keep off
the crowd. Kings must be neither pushed nor hustled." Then he waved his
paw with a flourish which meant, "Begone!" and Mr. Barnum, seeing the
roar coming, said, "Come on, Toodles."

[Illustration]

But Tom staid, and he was glad that he did so. The keeper of the lions
entered the cage, and the excitement began. The poor beasts were all
hungry, but the lioness and the little cubs were fed first; and when
King Lion seemed ready to tear the bars down in his fury, the keeper
fired off a pistol, and the angry creature leaped into the air. I think
even his own little baby cubs were afraid of him. When he grew quieter,
he, too, was fed, and Tom ran to tell Trixie all about it.

"I am glad I did not stay," she said, "and I have had a very good
time, myself. I have been looking at the giraffes in harness, and I do
think they make such funny looking horses. They look very much like
ostriches--_in the neck_," she added, and Mr. Barnum laughed.

The giraffe is so tall that it can take its food from high trees, and
it very seldom stoops to eat. But when a piece of sugar was put on the
ground, the temptation was so great that it bent its head down between
its fore feet, placed near together, and gobbled with a half-glide. Oh,
how the people laughed at its awkwardness.

[Illustration]

"What would mama say if we ate like that, Trixie?" said Tom.

"You could'nt do it," said the boy who had refused to pull the
elephants "front tail."

Far off, in one corner, the children saw something which they thought,
at first, was a dog, but as they came closer, it sat up like a monkey.

"That is a baboon," said Mr. Barnum. "It is so cross that I don't
believe it has a friend in the world; while the bright-looking baby
ourang-outang there, is always sure of a petting. That gray old
grandfather ourang-outang, however, can be very ugly; but we must
always be patient with old people," said he, smiling.

The Happy Family, they all declared, was less exciting, but quite as
interesting, as the lions' cage. They had enjoyed seeing the monkeys
alone, but a monkey isn't half a monkey until you see him with other
animals. Two solemn, old owls sat perched in one corner, and, when a
monkey flung an orange into the face of one of them, the other wouldn't
even wink. A funny old gray fellow put his paw through the bars and
pulled off Tom's cap, and it was only by the offer of a handful of nuts
that the owner got it back.

Another took a guinea-pig in her lap, and rocked it as if it were her
baby; but the sly chance of pulling a rabbit's ear was too much for
mother monkey, so she was off again, tossing a nut at a squirrel as she
passed.

White mice, little and pink-eyed, nibbled and squeaked, while the
friendly cats lapped their milk close by; and even the parrots seemed
to love the monkeys--a thing never heard of before.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

But how could they all fail to be happy together, living as they did,
in a menagerie! Oh! how the boys and girls envied them, feeling that
they would almost be willing to give up quarreling with their dear
brothers and sisters to enjoy such a life!

[Illustration]

"Trixie," cried Tom, when they had wandered away from the Happy Family,
"come and see this queer big pin-cushion!"

"What is it?" she asked, starting back.

"A porcupine," said Tom, laughing loudly. He had startled the strange
animal, which, fearing some danger near, had rolled itself into a ball,
and thrust out the quills with which it protects itself.

"Would you like to pet and smooth it, Gay?" asked Mr. Barnum.

[Illustration]

"No, no! I'd rather smooth that little animal," said she, pointing to
the chinchilla. "It looks like a sister of my little muff."

"O, Gay! you are a funny baby," said Trixie, laughing, and speaking as
though she, herself, were quite an elderly person.

"Do you want to see the kangaroo do the high running jump?" Tom asked.
But the kangaroo refused to jump for them. Mr. Barnum then told them
how, like the opossum, the mother carries her babies snugly tucked in
her pocket.

"We haven't seen any bears yet," said Trixie.

"No, but you _shall_ see them, Toodles," said Mr. Barnum. "Who ever
heard of a menagerie without its bears? And here they are!"

Up on their hind legs they stood, waiting a minute till the music
began, and then, at the first note of the fiddle, off they went--slowly
at first, then faster and faster, until really they were almost
graceful! Even the baby bears danced! But a grey old grizzly sat
gossiping with a polar bear in a corner, while they too watched the
dancing, like old ladies at a ball. Afterward, at a sign from the
master, the same old grizzly took the fiddle himself, and played for
the young people's dancing. Then the bears marched up and down, singly
and in pairs, "cooling off," Tom said.

Trixie heard a lady say to her friend, "The _camels_ are coming!" and
then they both laughed, but Trixie could not see why. Sure enough, the
camels _were_ coming, and racing camels are even more awkward than
dancing bears.

"Their backs are all broken," said Gay.

"No," said Tom, "they were born all humps and bumps--they are camels."

"Oh, yes!" said Gay. "I know--mama has got a shawl made out of one."

"And," added Tom, "he can drink enough at one time to last him a
hundred years."

"Don't stretch it, sir," said Mr. Barnum, shaking his head at the boy;
but Tom went on--"and he will carry you across the desert quicker than
lightning!"

The snakes, and especially the boa-constrictor, made Gay shiver, and
she refused to look at them after the first glance. But the others
enjoyed seeing them. "Nothing that is quiet frightens me," said Trixie,
"and I love to see the snakes twist and wriggle."

"I like the big green frogs," said Gay--"Ker-chong! ker-chong!" She had
learned the whole frog language in an instant!

Then she straggled away with Tom, to listen to wonderful stories about
the beaver, and how he builds his curious log hut; "But," added Tom,
"his roof always leaks."

"Gay, here is an animal with a name longer than you are yourself!" said
Mr. Barnum.

"What is it?" she asked, as they paused before a creature with a
tremendous mouth.

"The Hippopotamus."

"Hip-po-pot-a-mus!" baby tried to say after him, adding, "he is not
pretty, and I do not like him."

[Illustration]

Tom was still less polite, and called the animal "beastly ugly;" though
he seemed to admire the one-horned rhinoceros, which Gay thought still
more frightful. "But how wallopy his skin is!" said Tom.

[Illustration]

"Yes," said Mr. Barnum, "but he has a thinner skin under his heavy
hide, which is only what Trixie would call his 'upper skirt'--eh,
Toodles?" and the little girl laughed to think that he should know
anything about such drapery.

When she saw the alligator she wished for his scaly skin, that she
might have it made into slippers for papa.

[Illustration]

But what had become of Gay? She had left the others, and they found her
trying to stroke a downy little yellow chicken, which was just beyond
her reach.

"Why this is like being in the country!" cried the delighted Trixie,
looking around at the horses and the cattle, the pigs and the chickens.
"Where's Tom?"

But a barn-yard scene was quite too tame for that young gentleman,
who was chattering away to a funny little squat Esquimau, who did not
understand a word he said. Near him were a fat seal and a walrus with
two great tusks which seemed to say, "The better to eat you, my dear!"

The Esquimau and his pets had come from a faraway, cold country, where
there were very few people, and I do not think they liked the crowd and
the noise.

[Illustration]

"Where are the tigers?" Tom asked, suddenly remembering that he had set
his heart on being half-scared to death by the glance from a tiger's
eye.

"They certainly would never forgive us if we forgot to present
ourselves," said Mr. Barnum, bowing low before a cage, against the bars
of which the Royal Bengal Tiger was rubbing his glossy sides, as he
marched angrily backward and forward.

"Come away!" cried Trixie, trying to clasp her three friends in her
tiny arms.

"You go, Toodles, if you are afraid," said Mr. Barnum.

"No, no!" she cried, "I will not go without you!" and she became still
more frightened when she saw a beautiful, fierce-eyed leopard, and a
hyena whose horrible grin showed three rows of teeth.

"The little goose!" said Tom. "See! Gay enjoys it all." And so she
did, afterward going with him to look at the wolves, the wildcats, and
the dainty little red foxes, while Mr. Barnum took his pet to see the
brilliant birds which had been brought from their own homes in the hot
countries to our town of the little brown sparrow.

[Illustration]

Great green parrots, gold and silver pheasants, white cockatoos, and
the flaming red flamingo! Trixie was wild with joy, but, oh! she could
not half enjoy them without Gay and Tom; so she scampered off after
them, not noticing in her joy that she passed once again very near the
tiger's cage.

[Illustration]

The little Bird of Paradise, with its long train of plumage which
showed all the colors of the rainbow, was more beautiful than anything
they had ever imagined. "Let us stay here all the rest of the day!" Gay
said.

[Illustration]

"All the rest of the day, darling!" repeated Mr. Barnum, looking at his
watch, "Why it is almost time for my own birds to be in their nest."

[Illustration]

Yes, the sun was fast sinking in the west, and the time had come for
tired little feet to turn toward home. Mama was watching for them at
the parlor window, and she lifted baby in her arms as she opened the
door.

"O, mama! I want my supper, and I want to go to bed!"

[Illustration]

But in the middle of the night she awoke with a laugh, crying--"Oh, how
funny! I dreamed that the little Chinese dwarf was waltzing with the
giraffe!"

"Hush, darling!" said Trixie, softly, sitting up in her little crib.
"You'll wake mama, baby!"




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

One missing closing quotation mark was added to the text after: "He
swallowed a man once."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK P. T. BARNUM'S MENAGERIE***


******* This file should be named 45108-8.txt or 45108-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/5/1/0/45108



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
