The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of Noah's Ark, by E. Boyd Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Story of Noah's Ark

Author: E. Boyd Smith

Release Date: December 31, 2017 [EBook #56270]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF NOAH'S ARK ***




Produced by David Edwards, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the University of Florida Digital Collections.)










                        THE STORY OF NOAH’S ARK

                  TOLD AND PICTURED BY E. BOYD SMITH

                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK

                            [Illustration]


                   COPYRIGHT, 1905, by E. BOYD SMITH

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

                        PUBLISHED NOVEMBER 1905

                            [Illustration]




                        LIST OF COLORED PLATES


PLATE

    1. THE WARNING

    2. BUILDING THE ARK

    3. LABOR TROUBLES

    4. PAINTING THE ARK

  5-6. ASSEMBLING THE ANIMALS

    7. GOING ON BOARD

    8. CONFUSION

 9-10. THE PROCESSION

   11. THE DINOSAURS’ DILEMMA

   12. THOSE WHO WOULD NOT
        GO IN

   13. TAKING IN SUPPLIES

   14. WAITING FOR THE RAIN

   15. THE RAIN

   16. THE DELUGE

   17. INSIDE THE ARK

   18. LIFE AT SEA

   19. HOMESICKNESS

   20. STRAINED RELATIONS

   21. THE RAVEN IS SENT OUT

   22. RETURN OF THE DOVE

   23. FIRST SIGHT OF LAND

   24. LEAVING THE ARK

25-26. THE RAINBOW

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




                        THE STORY OF NOAH’S ARK




1. THE WARNING


In the early days of the world lived the patriarch Noah, a good and
venerable man whose years already numbered six hundred.

Now Noah was warned that a great flood was to come, which would pour
down from the clouds and drown the whole earth. He straightway told his
neighbors what was to happen, but they refused to believe, and scoffed
at him, and said: “Let it rain.”




[Illustration]




2. BUILDING THE ARK


Then Noah went his way, and set to work to build him a great ship, to be
ready for the day of deluge.

And he laid the keel in the pasture fields, among the daisies; while the
idlers came to look on and laugh at such folly--a ship for a rainy day!




[Illustration]




3. LABOR TROUBLES


But Noah knew that he was right, and kept on.

And the ship rose, but troubles arose too: for frequent and grievous
strikes delayed him, and his workmen clamored for more pay and stoned
those who would work.

And Noah bargained with them, and started afresh; for he feared that the
rain might come before he was ready.




[Illustration]




4. PAINTING THE ARK


At last, after many days, the ship was finished.

Then Noah tarred the inside and the outside, to keep it tight. And he
named it the Ark, and painted it with colors; for Noah was proud of his
work.




[Illustration]




5-6. ASSEMBLING THE ANIMALS


Then Noah went abroad and called together all the animals, by twos, and
told them that they must come into the Ark to be saved from the deluge.

But they too doubted, and were slow to decide; for they feared to enter
the dark ship.

And they grumbled, and said, “It may be but a shower.”




[Illustration]




5-6. ASSEMBLING THE ANIMALS (_continued_)


And though Noah argued with them, and explained all the terrible
possibilities of the case, still they hesitated, and in their different
tongues and ways talked it over, and would not be hurried.

Then Noah called them Stumbling Blocks. But even this did not move
them.




[Illustration]




7. GOING ON BOARD


And Noah was vexed, and left them, and began to drive his domestic
animals on board, hoping to set the others an example.

And his sons--Shem, Ham, and Japheth--helped him, while he kept count.




[Illustration]




8. CONFUSION


Then new troubles began. For now the other beasts and birds, fearing to
be left behind, all tried to get in at once, and could not be
controlled.

But they did not leave behind their dislikes and ancient feuds. For how
could the cats and the mice live together in peace, or how could the fox
and the geese agree? And the hounds and the hares?

And quarrels and dissensions came into the Ark. And confusion reigned.

And Noah lost count, and lost patience as well.




[Illustration]




9-10. THE PROCESSION


But after much trouble order was established; and the mighty procession,
once started, filed steadily in.

And they came from far and near: a great host of beasts and birds and
creeping things:




[Illustration]




9-10. THE PROCESSION (_continued_)


The big elephant and the polar bear, the giraffe and the striped tiger,
and the woolly bison of the west.

And from the mountain and the jungle, the hill and the plain, came great
and small.

And the earth trembled with their tread, while the sky was dark with
flapping wings.




[Illustration]




11. THE DINOSAURS’ DILEMMA


And then came even the huge dinosaurs, for in those days were mighty
beasts. But they were too big for the door, and could not squeeze in.

Now Noah sorely regretted this miscalculation, but could find no way to
help it.

And the dinosaurs, alas! had to be left behind.




[Illustration]




12. THOSE WHO WOULD NOT GO IN


But the mammoth and the mastodon, and the dinotherium, the palæotherium,
and the anoptherium, and the pterodactyl, and the archæopteryx,--and a
host of other strange beasts and birds with long Latin names,--refused
to go in at all, in spite of Noah’s warnings.

All these of course were doomed to be lost, and become fossils, to be
put in museums with stones and labels.




[Illustration]




13. TAKING IN SUPPLIES


Then Noah took on board in plenty foods of every kind for men and
beasts. While the hungry animals inside complained that he should have
done this first instead of last.

And then he took his wife and his sons’ wives into the Ark, though Mrs.
Noah was loath and rebelled: “For the domestic arrangements,” she said,
“are impossible.”




[Illustration]




14. WAITING FOR THE RAIN


And now, all being at last ready, the sun still shone, and the rain did
not come. And they waited and waited.

And the scoffers laughed and jeered, and called to Noah that it was
going to be a dry season.

And Noah was sore perplexed, and marveled, though never doubting.




[Illustration]




15. THE RAIN


But at last the rain did come, and beat down upon the scoffers, and they
were wet.

And Noah’s sons and their wives triumphed. And even the animals were
pleased.

But Noah felt only sorrow for his stubborn neighbors, for he knew that
much more rain would fall.




[Illustration]




16. THE DELUGE


And then for forty days and forty nights it rained hard. And the clouds
were rent asunder. And a mighty deluge flooded the whole earth. And the
waters rose and covered the trees, and then the hills and mountains,
till no dry land might anywhere be seen.

But the Ark was lifted up and floated safely away on a stormy sea.




[Illustration]




17. INSIDE THE ARK


Now inside the storm-tossed ship was much discomfort and grievous
trouble. And many even regretted that they had been saved. “For lo!”
they said, “nothing could be worse than this.”

And Noah’s heart was heavy.




[Illustration]




18. LIFE AT SEA


But when the storm was passed and the good ship floated on an even keel,
they felt better and settled down to their new life.

And the animals took a keen interest in the passenger list, to find
their own names, as passengers always do.

And lazy days slipped quietly by; and the stout Ark drifted slowly on
her way.




[Illustration]




19. HOMESICKNESS


But alas, this could not last. For as the days dragged on and they found
themselves still shut up and afloat, they brooded and grew low in their
minds.

And a great homesickness, and longing for a change of any kind, came
over them. And a wail of despair went up from the Ark. And the roof
leaked. And all was gloom.

And life became a burden to the Noah family.




[Illustration]




20. STRAINED RELATIONS


And then patience and good temper deserted the Ark.

And the animals fretted and quarreled, and there was riot and disorder,
and furious battle.

And Noah’s task grew ever harder, and his load heavier to bear.




[Illustration]




21. THE RAVEN IS SENT OUT


Now Noah became desperate, and something had to be done; so he sent off
a raven to bring tidings from the outer world.

But the raven, once free, had no thought of returning, and flew far
away, saying to himself: “Never again will I be caught in that trap.”

And Noah waited for news, but none came.




[Illustration]




22. RETURN OF THE DOVE


Then, as matters grew worse. Noah sent forth a dove. “She is a gentle
bird and will surely come again to her home,” he thought. And the dove
did return, for she found only water, and no rest for her foot.

Then Noah waited seven days and again sent her out. And she came back,
bringing in her beak a twig from the olive tree.

And all welcomed her with joy, for now they knew that the waters were
falling.




[Illustration]




23. FIRST SIGHT OF LAND


Then Noah waited still another seven days, and again sent out the dove.
But this time she did not come back.

And Noah climbed to his skylight, and lifted it up, and looked out.

And behold the earth had risen from the waters, still damp, but yet
solid earth.

And Noah passed along the good word. And in the Ark was great
excitement, and hope revived.




[Illustration]




24. LEAVING THE ARK


And soon the good ship thumped and bumped, and struck bottom. And though
she landed at an uncomfortable angle, on a mountain top, they knew that
at last the great cruise was ended.

And Noah opened the door, and let down the gang-plank.

And beasts and birds surged out on the desolate rock; and though the mud
was thick and heavy, some found it to their liking, and all preferred it
to the ship.




[Illustration]




25-26. THE RAINBOW


Now the sun again arose, and sucked up the dampness from the earth.

And a bright rainbow was set in the sky, as a sign that nevermore would
a flood cover the whole earth.

Then Spring burst forth, with all its glory and promise. And a new world
began. And all was life and joy.




[Illustration]




25-26. THE RAINBOW (_continued_)


And Noah bade the beasts and birds go forth and seek new homes. And they
scattered in every direction to begin life afresh; while Noah’s wife
murmured “good riddance,” and vowed that she would never go to sea
again.

Then Noah gladly rested from his labors.

And this is the end of the story of Noah’s Ark.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Noah's Ark, by E. Boyd Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF NOAH'S ARK ***

***** This file should be named 56270-0.txt or 56270-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/7/56270/

Produced by David Edwards, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the University of Florida Digital Collections.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
