The Project Gutenberg EBook of Dido, the Dancing Bear, by Richard Barnum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Dido, the Dancing Bear
       His Many Adventures

Author: Richard Barnum

Illustrator: C. P. Bluemlein

Release Date: February 19, 2020 [EBook #61450]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIDO, THE DANCING BEAR ***




Produced by Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







[Illustration: Dido did jump through the blazing hoop to get the
apple.]




                       _Kneetime Animal Stories_


                                 DIDO
                           THE DANCING BEAR

                          HIS MANY ADVENTURES


                                  BY
                            RICHARD BARNUM

           Author of “Squinty, the Comical Pig,” “Mappo, the
             Merry Monkey,” “Tum Tum, the Jolly Elephant,”
                 “Blackie, a Lost Cat,” “Flop Ear, the
                          Funny Rabbit,” etc.


                            _ILLUSTRATED BY
                           C. P. BLUEMLEIN_


                              PUBLISHERS
                            BARSE &amp; HOPKINS
                  NEW YORK, N. Y.      NEWARK, N. J.




KNEETIME ANIMAL STORIES

By Richard Barnum

_Illustrated._


  SQUINTY, THE COMICAL PIG
  SLICKO, THE JUMPING SQUIRREL
  MAPPO, THE MERRY MONKEY
  TUM TUM, THE JOLLY ELEPHANT
  DON, A RUNAWAY DOG
  DIDO, THE DANCING BEAR
  BLACKIE, A LOST CAT
  FLOP EAR, THE FUNNY RABBIT
  TINKLE, THE TRICK PONY
  LIGHTFOOT, THE LEAPING GOAT

(_Other volumes in preparation_)

 BARSE &amp; HOPKINS
 Publishers      New York


                            Copyright, 1916
                                  by
                            Barse &amp; Hopkins


                       _Dido, the Dancing Bear_

                           MADE IN U. S. A.




CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                          PAGE
     I  DIDO CUTS UP                 7
    II  DIDO IS CAUGHT              16
   III  DIDO IS TRAINED             28
    IV  DIDO LEARNS TO DANCE        38
     V  DIDO CROSSES THE OCEAN      48
    VI  DIDO IN THE COUNTRY         58
   VII  DIDO MEETS DON              66
  VIII  DIDO HELPS A GIRL           74
    IX  DIDO IN THE BAKERY          83
     X  DIDO SCARES A MAN           92
    XI  DIDO IN THE CIRCUS         100
   XII  DIDO IN A FIRE             109




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                            PAGE

 Dido did jump through the blazing hoop to get the
     apple                                         _Frontispiece_

 But Dido climbed up a tree to get away                       23

 Into the tub of water he jumped with a splash                43

 Dido, the dancing bear and Tum Tum, the jolly elephant       65

 Just as the dog was going to jump Dido stepped in
     between them                                             81

 Jacko and Dido were eating cakes from the window             95

 He soon had opened the cage of the dancing bear and
     Dido jumped out                                         117




DIDO, THE DANCING BEAR




CHAPTER I

DIDO CUTS UP


In the woods, on top of a mountain, in a far-off country there once
lived a family of nice bears. I call them nice bears for they were. Of
course they had long claws, and sharp teeth, but they never bit any
one, or scratched any one, because there were no boys or girls, or men
or women, living in that part of the woods.

I suppose, though, if a boy went on top of the mountain, and began
throwing stones or sticks at the nice bears, they might have run out
and scratched him to make him go away. Mind, I’m not saying for sure,
but maybe. But, as I have said, there were no boys in the woods to
bother the bears who lived all by themselves in a den among the rocks.

A bear’s house is called a den, because it is such a nice, cozy, warm
place, just as your father or brother may have a room of his own, all
fixed up with the things he likes best, and he calls that his den.

Well, in this den in the woods on top of the mountain lived the five
bears. There was Mr. Bear, the papa, and Mrs. Bear, the mother, and
there were three little bears, called cubs, just as little dogs are
called puppies.

One little bear was named Gruffo, because he had such a deep, gruff
voice, though it was not at all cross. And another bear was named
Muffo, because he had such big, soft furry paws that when he folded
them together it looked just as if he were carrying a muff.

And besides Gruffo and Muffo there was another bear, the smallest of
the three, called Dido. Now I am going to tell you some of the many
adventures Dido had. Adventures, you know, are what happen to you.

“Gruffo and Muffo, you must take good care of your little brother Dido
when you go off playing in the woods,” said Mrs. Bear, for though the
bears could not speak in our language they had talk of their own which
was just as plain to them as our A B and C talk is to us.

“Take good care of Dido,” Mrs. Bear would say. “Don’t run away from
him, or he might be lost. And don’t climb big trees and leave him on
the ground, or something might happen to him. And never take him too
far out in the water of the lake when you go swimming, or he might be
drowned.”

“We won’t, Mother,” said Gruffo and Muffo. “We’ll take good care of
Dido.”

“Oh, I guess I can take care of myself,” said Dido, making a funny face
with his queer, black, rubbery nose.

“Now that wasn’t a nice thing to say,” said Mrs. Bear, holding up her
paw and gently shaking it at Dido. “You ought to be glad your bigger
brothers will look after you.”

“Oh, so I am, Mother,” answered Dido. “I’m sorry I spoke that way. May
they take me swimming now, down to the lake?”

“I guess so,” answered Mrs. Bear. “Run along, little cubs. I have to go
out and see if I can find some berries or sweet roots for your dinner.”

Bears, you know, like to eat berries and the sweet roots of some trees
and bushes. Bears also like fish, and honey. Say! if ever you have a
pet bear, which might some day happen, you know, and you want to give
him a special extra treat, just bring him some honey. He will love it
so much that he will eat every bit of it up, box and all!

So while Dido, with his brothers Gruffo and Muffo, walked on along the
mountain path to the lake, Mrs. Bear went off in the woods to find
some roots and berries for dinner. Of course the little bears might
have been able to find some for themselves, but you know how it is with
children. Even though they know where the things are to eat they like
their mother to get a meal for them.

“I can run faster than you can!” cried Dido to his two brothers, as
they went along through the woods. “Look!” And off he started, swinging
from side to side, brushing the bushes out of his way as he went.

“Pooh! I can go faster than that!” called Gruffo in his deep voice.
“Watch me!”

Then he began to run, and, as he was bigger than Dido, of course he ran
faster, and soon passed him.

“I can beat you, Gruffo!” cried Muffo. “See!” Then Muffo ran, and of
course he easily ran ahead of the other two bear cubs.

“Let’s have another race,” said Dido, a little later. “I think I can
beat you both then,” and slipping up behind Gruffo he began tickling
him in his ear with a piece of tree branch.

“Ouch! What’s that, a bee?” cried Gruffo, brushing his ear with his
paw, for his ear tickled. He did not see what Dido was doing.

“Let me alone, bee!” growled Gruffo. “That is, unless you will show me
the hollow tree where you have some honey,” went on the bear cub. “If
you do that you may tickle me all you please!”

“Ha! Ha!” laughed Muffo at the funny way Dido was tickling Gruffo. “Ha!
Ha! Ho! Ho!” and he nearly fell down, he laughed so hard.

Of course I don’t mean to say that bears laugh as we do, but they have
their own way of making fun and laughing at it. So when I say, in this
story, that a bear laughs, or talks or does anything, I mean he does it
in a bear’s way, and not in our way.

“Where is that bee?” asked Gruffo. And then, as he heard Muffo
laughing, and Dido giggling, Gruffo turned quickly and saw that it was
his little brother tickling him in the ear with the stick.

“Here, you stop that!” cried Gruffo, and he reached out his paw to
catch Dido. But Dido jumped back, and so quickly that he tripped over a
tree root, and down he went, turning a back somersault.

“Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho!” laughed Gruffo this time. “That was very funny, Dido.
Do it again!”

“No,” answered Dido, “I will not, if you please. I did not do it on
purpose, and besides, I bumped my nose when I fell.”

“Oh, that’s too bad!” said Gruffo, for he remembered what his mother
had said about looking after little Dido. “I’m sorry you hurt your
nose,” went on Gruffo. “Still, if you had not tickled me you would not
have fallen. Never mind, here is some soft mud you can hold on your
nose, that will make it well.”

From a wet place, near a spring of water, Gruffo took up some soft mud,
and put it on his little brother’s nose.

“Does that make the pain better?” asked Gruffo.

“Lots better, thank you,” answered Dido. For it is true that bears and
other animals use mud as we do plaster and poultices. If ever your dog
gets stung by a bee on the nose, you watch him hunt for some soft mud
to put on the stinging place.

“Well, come on if we’re going swimming,” said Muffo, after a bit.

So the three bears went on through the woods on the mountain, until
they came to the lake, where the water was blue and clear and cold.
Without stopping to take off any clothes (for of course they did not
wear any), the three bears plunged into the water and began swimming
about. Bears love to play in the water, and that is why, in parks and
other places where they keep tame bears, there is always a pool of
water for them to splash in. And sometimes there is a wooden ball in
the water for the bears to play with, too, for bears love to play.

“Watch me dive!” cried Dido, and down he went under the water. Up he
came, a little later, right near Muffo, and with his paw Dido splashed
some water in Muffo’s face.

“Say, you’re cutting up a lot to-day, Dido!” cried Muffo. “What makes
you do so many tricks?”

“Oh, I just feel happy!” cried Dido, gayly.

Then he swam about some more, splashing in the water of the lake, and
lapping some water with his red tongue.

“I wish we could catch some fish,” said Gruffo, after a bit. “I’m
hungry.”

“So am I,” said Muffo. “Let’s go fishing.”

“I’m coming, too,” said Dido.

The bears came up out of the water, with their fur dripping wet, and
started to go fishing. They did not need poles or lines or hooks. All
they had to do was to sit on a log, near the lake, and when, by looking
down, they saw a fish swimming along they just put their claws quickly
in and pulled the fish out. It was very easy for them, but it would
have been hard for you or me.

“Ha! I see a fish!” suddenly cried Dido. “Watch me catch him!”

Down into the water he thrust his paw. But something was wrong. Either
Dido did not see the fish, and only thought he did, or he went after
it too quickly. For he reached over too far, and the next thing he knew
he was splashing in the lake again. He had fallen in.

“Ho! Ho!” laughed Muffo. “That’s a queer way to fish, Dido.”

“I――I didn’t meant to do that!” spluttered Dido, as he crawled out on
the bank.

“Try again,” said Gruffo, as he helped his little brother out on the
log. “Maybe next time you will catch one. Now you watch how I do it,”
for Gruffo knew that Dido was little, and had many things to learn that
bears must know if they are to get along in the woods.

Pretty soon Gruffo saw a big fish, and with one scoop of his paw he
landed it on the bank.

“Oh, that’s a fine one!” cried Dido. “I wish I could catch one like
that.”

“I’ll give you some of this,” said Gruffo kindly. “There is enough for
all of us.”

Then he divided the fish with his two brothers, and they ate it, not
stopping to cook it as we would have to do. Bears like their meat and
fish without being cooked.

After they had eaten the fish, and had swam in the lake to wash their
paws and faces, the three bears went back to the den in the rocks.

“Oh, Mother, we had such fun!” cried Dido. Then he saw his father
asleep in the sun, and, taking up a leafy branch Dido went softly over
and began to tickle Mr. Bear on the nose.

“Wuff! Ker-choo!” sneezed Mr. Bear. “What’s that; a fly?”

“Oh, it’s just Dido,” said Mrs. Bear. “He’s cutting up again. You must
not be too funny,” she went on, shaking her paw at her little bear cub,
“or some day something may happen to you.”

And one day something did happen to Dido.




CHAPTER II

DIDO IS CAUGHT


One nice, warm sunny day, when it was too hot to stay inside the den
among the rocks, the nice bears were all out in front, lying in the
shade of the woods.

“Oh, my! How hot it is!” cried Dido, and he opened his mouth wide, and
let his red tongue hang out, for animals, such as dogs and bears, cool
themselves off that way. You must have seen your dog, when he had run
fast, after a cat, perhaps, open his mouth and breathe fast, with his
tongue hanging out.

“Let’s go swimming in the lake again!” cried Dido to his brothers.

“All right,” agreed Gruffo.

“We’ll all go,” said Mr. Bear. “Come along.”

So off through the woods walked the family of bears toward the cool,
blue lake, high up in the mountains. Dido could hardly wait to get
there, and as soon as he saw, through the trees, the sparkle of the
water he began to run. He ran so fast that he stumbled over a stone,
and fell down.

“Oh, Dido!” called his mother. “You must be more careful. You must not
go so fast. Something will happen to you some day if you do not look
where you are going.”

“I didn’t hurt myself that time, anyhow,” answered Dido, as he got up,
and jumped into the lake. There he swam about, as did the father and
mother bear, and the other two cubs. Dido splashed his brothers every
time he came near them, but they did not mind, for he was such a cute
little fellow and he meant no harm. Besides, it was so warm that the
more water they had on them the better Gruffo and Muffo liked it.

“It makes me hungry to go in swimming,” said Mrs. Bear. “I am going off
in the woods to look for some berries.”

“I’m coming, too,” said Dido. “For I am hungry myself.”

Soon Mrs. Bear found a bush on which were growing some big red berries.
These she pulled off with her forepaws, which were, to her, almost like
our hands are to us, and the mother bear filled her mouth with the
fruit. Dido did the same, and soon he was not as hungry as he had been.
Then along came Mr. Bear, with Gruffo and Muffo, and they, too, ate the
red berries off the bushes.

All at once Mr. Bear stopped eating, and, lifting his nose up in the
air, sniffed very hard two or three times.

“What is the matter?” asked Mrs. Bear quickly.

“I think I smell a man,” answered the papa bear. “See if you can smell
anything.”

Mrs. Bear lifted her nose up in the air and she, also, sniffed. Bears,
you know, as do most wild animals, use their noses as much as they do
their eyes to tell when there is danger. And to wild animals a man,
nearly always, means danger. If you were out in the woods, and could
not see any one, you could not tell, just by smelling the air, whether
some person was near you or not――that is, unless they had a lot of
perfume on them, and then, if the wind was blowing toward you, why you
might smell that.

But bears have much better noses for smelling than have we, and they
can smell a man in the woods even if he has no cologne on him.

“Sniff! Sniff!” went Mr. Bear.

“Sniff! Sniff!” went Mrs. Bear.

“Yes, I can surely smell a man,” the papa bear said in a low voice. “It
is the first time I have known them to come around here.”

“And so can I smell a man,” added Mrs. Bear. “We had better get away
from here.”

Then the bears ran off through the woods to their den. For though big
bears are very strong and can fight well, they would much rather run
away from a man than fight him, unless they find they can not get away.
For when a man goes into the woods where there are bears he nearly
always has a gun with him, and while bears know they are stronger than
a man they also know that a gun is stronger than a dozen bears.

When Dido, with his brothers and father and mother, got back to the den
in the rocks, the little bear cub saw that his father was worried about
something. Mr. Bear walked up and down in front of the pile of rocks,
sniffing the air, and looking on all sides.

“What is the matter, Papa?” asked Dido, in bear talk, of course.

“It’s that man I smelled in the woods,” said Mr. Bear. “I fear he may
find our den.”

“Well, what if he does?” asked Dido.

“Then it would not be safe for us to stay here,” answered Mrs. Bear.
“If men are coming into our woods it is time for us to go away.”

“What! go away from our nice den?” asked Gruffo. For though the den was
only a hole in the rocks, with a pile of leaves in one corner for a
bed, still, to the bears, it was as much a home as your house is to you.

“Yes, it would not be safe to stay while men are around,” said Mr.
Bear. “That is the first time I have ever smelled them in our woods.
Though a friend of mine, Mr. Lion, who lives farther down the mountain,
said he has often seen men near his cave. Once some men on elephants
chased him, but he got away.”

“Have you ever seen a man?” asked Dido of his father.

“Oh, yes, often, but always afar off. And the men did not see me.”

“What does a man look like?” asked Dido, for he had never seen any,
though he had heard of them.

“A man is a queer creature,” said Mr. Bear. “He walks up on his hind
feet, as we do sometimes, but when he walks on his four feet he can
only go slowly, like a baby. Even you could run away from a man on his
four feet, Dido.”

“How queer!” said the little bear.

“But don’t try it,” said Mrs. Bear quickly. “Keep away from men, Dido,
for they might shoot you with one of their guns.”

“What else is a man like?” the little bear asked.

“Well, he has a skin that he can take off and put on again,” said Mr.
Bear.

“Oh, how very funny!” cried Dido. “Take off his skin? I should think it
would hurt!”

“It doesn’t seem to,” said the papa bear. “I don’t understand how they
do it, but they do.”

Of course what Mr. Bear thought was skin was a man’s clothes, which he
takes off and puts on again. But though bears are very wise and smart
in their own way, they don’t know much about men, except to be afraid
of them.

“I do not like it that men are coming up in our woods,” said Mr. Bear.
“It means danger. So be careful, Dido, and you, too, Gruffo and Muffo,
that you do not go too far away. Perhaps the man has come up here to
set a trap to catch us.”

“What is a trap?” asked Dido.

“It is something dangerous, to catch bears,” his mother told him. “Some
traps are made of iron, and they have sharp teeth in them that catch
bears by the leg and hurt very much. Other traps are like a big box,
made of logs. If you go in one of these box traps the door will shut
and you can not get out.”

“What happens then?” asked Dido.

“Then the man comes and gets you.”

“And what does he do with you?” the little bear cub wanted to know.

“That I can not say,” answered Mrs. Bear. “Perhaps your father knows.”

Mr. Bear shook his head.

“All I know,” he answered, “is that the man takes you away if he finds
you in his trap. But where he takes you I do not know, for I was never
caught, and I hope I never will be.”

“I hope so, too,” said Dido, and he sniffed the air to see if he could
smell the man, but he could not.

For a number of days after that the bears did not go far from their den
in the rocks. They were afraid the man might shoot them.

But, after a while, all the berries and sweet roots close by had been
eaten, and the bears had to go farther off. Besides, they wanted some
fish, and they must go to the lake or river to catch them. So after Mr.
Bear had carefully sniffed the air, and had not smelled the man-smell,
the bears started off through the woods again to get something to eat.

Dido ran here and there, sometimes on ahead and again he would stay
behind, slipping up back of his brothers to tickle them. Oh, but Dido
was a jolly little bear, always looking for fun.

The bears found some more red berries, and a few blue ones, and some
sweet roots, and they also caught some fish, which made a good dinner
for them. Then they went swimming in the lake again before going back
to their den.

In the afternoon, when Gruffo was asleep in the shade, Dido went softly
up to him, and poured a paw full of water in his brother’s ear.

[Illustration: But Dido climbed up a tree to get away.]

“Wuff! Ouch! What’s that? Is it raining?” cried Gruffo, suddenly waking
up. Then he saw that Dido had played the trick on him, and he ran after
the little bear. But Dido climbed up a tree to get away, and he did it
in such a funny way, his little short tail going around like a Fourth
of July pinwheel, that Gruffo had to sit down and laugh.

“Oh, you are such a funny cut-up bear!” he said, laughing harder than
ever, and when a bear laughs he can’t very well climb a tree.

“Come on down, I won’t do anything to you,” said Gruffo, after a while,
so Dido came down. Then he turned somersaults on a pile of soft leaves.
Next he stood on his hind legs, and began striking at a swinging branch
of a tree with his front paws, as you have seen a kitten play with a
cord of a window curtain.

“Dido is getting to be a real cute little cub,” said Mrs. Bear.

Then, all of a sudden, Dido struck at the tree branch, but he did not
hit it and he fell over backward.

“Look out!” cried Mr. Bear. “You’ll hurt yourself, Dido.”

“I didn’t hurt myself that time,” said the little bear, “for I fell on
some soft, green moss.”

“Well, there will not always be moss for you to fall on,” his mother
said. “So look out.”

One day, when Mr. Bear came back from a long trip in the woods, he
brought some wild honey in his paws. And oh! how good it tasted to
Dido and Gruffo and Muffo!

“Show me where the bee-tree is, Papa,” begged Dido. “I want to get some
more honey.”

“It is too far away,” answered the papa bear. “Besides, I saw a man in
the woods as I was getting the honey out of a hollow tree. It would not
be safe for you to go near it when men are around.”

But the honey tasted so good to Dido that the little bear cub made up
his mind that he simply must have more.

“I know what I’ll do,” he said to himself. “When none of the others
are watching me I am going off by myself in the woods and look for a
bee-tree to get some honey. I don’t believe there’s any danger.”

So about a week after this, one day, Dido saw his two brothers asleep
outside the den. Mr. Bear had gone off to the lake, perhaps to catch
some fish, and Mrs. Bear was in the den, stirring up the leaves that
made the bed, so it would be softer to lie on.

“Now’s my chance,” thought Dido, in the way bears have of thinking.
“I’ll just slip off in the woods by myself, and find a honey-tree. I’ll
bring some honey home, too,” said Dido, for he was not a selfish little
bear.

Walking softly, so as not to awaken his brothers, and so his mother,
making the leaf-bed in the den, would not know what he was doing, away
slipped Dido to the woods.

He shuffled along, now and then finding some red berries to eat, or a
bit of sweet root, and every little while he would lift his nose up in
the air, as he had seen his father do, and sniff to see if he could
smell a man-smell.

“But I don’t smell any,” said Dido. “I guess it’s all right.”

Then, all at once, he felt a little wind blowing toward him, and on the
breeze came the nicest smell.

“Oh, it’s honey!” cried Dido. “It’s honey! I have found the honey-tree!
Oh, how glad I am!”

He hurried on through the woods, coming nearer and nearer to the honey
smell all the while, until, after a bit, he saw in among the trees
something square, like a box, made of little logs piled together. And
inside the thing like a box was a pile of honey. Dido could see it and
smell it. But he did not rush up in a great hurry.

“That doesn’t look like the honey-tree father told about,” the little
bear cub thought. “He said he had to climb a tree. This honey is low
down. Still it is honey, so this must be a honey-tree, and if it is
low down so much the better for me. I will not have to climb.”

Dido sniffed the air again. He wanted to see if there was a man-smell
about. But all he could smell was the honey.

“Oh, I guess it’s all right,” said the bear cub. “I’m so hungry for
that honey I can’t wait! Here I go!”

Dido fairly ran into the box and began to eat the honey on the floor
of it. But, no sooner had he taken a bite, than suddenly a queer thing
happened.

_Bang!_ went something behind Dido, and when he looked around he saw
that the box was shut tight. A sliding door had fallen down and poor
Dido was a prisoner.




CHAPTER III

DIDO IS TRAINED


For a moment Dido was so frightened that he did not know what to do.
His heart beat very fast, just as you can feel your kittie’s heart beat
fast after a dog has chased her. The little bear cub stopped eating the
honey, good as it was, and he looked carefully around him.

“I wonder what has happened to me?” mused Dido.

He soon guessed. For when he tried to get out the same way he had come
in, he found he could not. A heavy door of logs had fallen down, and
push as hard as he could, Dido could not open it.

“Oh dear!” whined the little bear cub. “I guess I am in one of those
traps papa told about. This must be a box trap. But how did the honey
get here? That is caught, too.”

Thinking of the honey made Dido hungry for some more, so he ate a
little.

Then Dido tried again to get out, scratching with his strong little
claws on the log sides of the big box. But Dido could not get out that
way any more than he could break through the thick door. Soon the
little bear cub was very much frightened, and he cared no more for the
honey, though there was some left.

“Oh dear! Oh dear!” thought Dido. “I have done something very wrong.
I ought not to have gone off in the woods by myself. Papa said there
might be traps, but I did not think this was one. I did not sniff the
man-smell, I only smelled the honey.”

Poor, foolish Dido! That was why the man who had set the trap had put
the honey in it――so the bear, if one came along, would smell that sweet
stuff and not notice the man-odor.

With his heart beating faster than ever, Dido now ran around all sides
of the box-trap, trying to find a way out. But there was none. He could
look through the cracks between the logs, and see the green woods where
he had walked along so freely only a little while before. But now Dido
could not get out to climb a tree or do anything else.

“Oh, what will happen to me?” he asked himself. “I must get out! I must
get out!”

But Dido could not. He grew tired of running around the cage, and
pushing on the sides and doors. His paws ached. His tongue was hanging
out like a dog’s, and his breath came fast.

“I’ll lie down and rest,” said Dido. “Perhaps by then my papa or mamma
will come and look for me and let me out.”

So Dido rested and then he ate a little more of the honey. It did not
taste as nice now, for he was in trouble, and when even a bear is in
trouble he can not eat well.

Dido waited and waited, but no papa or mamma bear came for him. It is
true that Mr. Bear and Mrs. Bear soon missed their little cub, and they
went looking for him, but I will tell you about that part later on.

All at once Dido, in the trap, heard the voices of some men talking. He
knew they must be men, for he had heard his father tell about them. And
Dido also noticed the man-smell coming to him through the cracks in the
trap. He could smell that queer smell now, even though he was close to
the honey.

“Ha!” cried one man. “The trap is closed! There must be a bear in it!”

“Don’t be too sure,” said another man. “Maybe he got out.”

“Oh dear, if I only _could_ get out,” thought Dido, though he did not
know what the men said. Later on he was to learn to know man-talk,
though he could never speak it himself. Just as your dog knows what you
say when you call him to come to you, or to run home, though your dog
can not speak to you, except by barking, which, I suppose, is a sort of
dog language.

Anyhow, Dido heard the men talking, even if he did not know what they
said. They hurried up to the trap, as Dido could see, and one looked in
through a crack.

“We’ve caught a bear!” cried the first man. “We really have!”

“Have we?” asked the other. “That’s good.”

“But he’s an awful little one,” said the first man.

“Never mind, he’ll grow fast enough,” the second man said. “And they
are easier to train to dance when they are little.”

“What funny things those men are saying,” thought Dido. “I wonder if
they are talking about me? Maybe they will let me out.”

But the men did not seem to be going to do that. They walked all around
the trap, looking carefully at it.

“He can’t get out,” said the big man, for Dido could see that one man
was tall, and the other short, just as Dido’s father was larger than
he. “He can’t get out of the trap,” said the big man, “and we can pick
it up, with him in it, and carry it away. If we had caught a bigger
bear we could not do that.”

“That honey you put in the trap made good bait,” said the short man.

“I thought it would,” replied the other. “Bears will go almost anywhere
to get honey. And as soon as this one went in and began eating, he
loosened the rope that held up the door, and it fell down. That’s how
he was caught.”

Dido did not understand all this talk, but he wished, with all his
heart, that he had not gone in to eat the honey.

“Come on,” said the big man, “we’ll carry the cage-trap out to the road
and put it on the wagon. Then, in a few days, I will begin to teach
this bear to dance.”

Dido ran around in the cage or trap once more, trying to get out, but
he could not. And the next thing he knew he felt himself being lifted
up and carried along. This frightened him more than ever, but there
was nothing he could do, for he could not get out. He could smell the
man-smell very plainly now, for the men were walking along close to the
trap, carrying it.

Pretty soon Dido could see, through the cracks, that the woods were not
as thick as they had been. He was being taken away from his beloved
forest where he had lived all his short life. He was being taken away
from the den-house, and from his father and mother and brothers.

And, even though Dido was only a bear he felt badly, as all animals do
when they are taken to a new and strange place.

“If ever I get out of this trap,” thought Dido, “I’ll bite and scratch
those men until they let me go.”

Biting and scratching comes natural to bears, as it does to some cats,
you know, and you could hardly find fault with Dido for wanting to get
loose. He did not learn, until afterward, that the men were going to be
kind to him.

Pretty soon Dido felt his trap being lifted up. Then it was set down
on a wagon, and horses began to draw it down the mountain to the place
where the trappers lived. For the two men were trappers, and they set
traps in the woods to catch wild animals, which they trained to do
tricks and sold to circuses, or to persons who wanted them. Dido did
not learn until afterward what horses were, but he knew they must be
strong animals to pull a heavy wagon and the two men and himself in the
log-trap.

How long he rode on the wagon Dido did not know, but after a while he
felt himself being lifted up again and he was carried into a queer
place. Though the little bear cub did not know what it was he found
out later that it was a barn. It was dark in there, almost as dark as
in the woods at night, but Dido was not afraid of the dark. He rather
liked it.

“Are you going to take the little bear out of the trap?” asked the
little man.

“Not right away,” answered the big man. “I will first let him get
quiet. I want to tame him a bit so he will not bite. I won’t give him
anything to eat or drink for a long while, and then he will be so
hungry and thirsty that he will not be afraid when I come near to give
him something.”

And that is just what happened to Dido. The sweet honey had made him
thirsty, and he was very warm from having tried so hard to get out of
the trap. Oh! how he wanted a drink of water from the cool, blue lake!
But there was no water in the cage-trap.

Finally Dido fell asleep. When he opened his eyes again he could see a
little light shining through the chinks of the trap. Then he smelled
the man-smell again, and he heard the big man say:

“Well, I wonder how my little bear is to-day?”

Dido growled, as all wild bears do when first they know a man is near
them.

“Not very tame yet, I guess,” the man said. “But you soon will be, when
you get hungrier and more thirsty.”

Dido thought he never had been so thirsty. His mouth was hot, and his
tongue was dry. That was worse than being hungry. All day long he had
no water, though he whined for it as he had whined when he was a little
baby bear and wanted his mother to feed him.

On the second day the big man opened a little hole in the trap. Dido
quickly put out his head――that was all he could put out. The man
reached his hand toward Dido, who growled good and hard.

“Quiet now! Quiet!” said the man. “I won’t hurt you. Here is some water
for you to drink.” He put down a basin of water where Dido could reach
it, and the smell of that water was so good to Dido that he drank it
even while the man was standing near. And as the bear drank the man
patted him on the head and spoke softly to him. This time Dido did not
growl, for he liked to be petted. But, best of all, he liked the water.

Then the hole in the cage was closed again, and Dido was left alone.
He was getting quite hungry now, but there was nothing to eat. He had
eaten all the honey, and licked clean the boards where it had been.

“Oh, how I wish I had some red berries or sweet roots,” thought the
little bear cub. And just then he smelled something that made his nose
quiver. It was fish.

“Oh, I wonder if my father has come for me and brought me a fish from
the blue lake?” Dido asked himself.

But when the little hole in the trap was opened Dido saw the big man.
Dido growled, and then he was sorry, for he saw the man holding out a
piece of fish to him.

“I guess you’ll soon be tame,” said the man. “Come now, be a nice
bear.” Then Dido ate the fish, and had more water to drink.

For nearly a week Dido was kept in the cage. Each day the man came to
feed and water him, and the man always patted the bear cub on the head
and spoke kindly to him. After a while Dido did not mind the man-smell
at all. He got rather to like it, and to like the man who fed him. So
that, in a few days, when the man opened the big door of the trap, and
let Dido come out, the bear cub did not try to run away.

For he saw no place to which he could run. There were no woods, just a
big barn, the doors of which were closed. Besides, Dido thought if he
ran away he would get no more fish or water.

“Now I’ll put a collar on you, with a chain, so you won’t get lost, and
then I’ll begin to train you to dance,” said the big man.

Dido felt something being fastened around his neck. He did not mind
very much, for, at the same time, the man gave him something new to
eat. It was soft and white and tasted rather sweet, though not as sweet
as honey.

“Oh, but that is good!” thought Dido. The man had given him a chunk of
bread, which bears like very much. When he had eaten the bread Dido
looked around for more, and he took another piece from the man’s hand,
and did not growl or bite. Dido was getting tame, you see.




CHAPTER IV

DIDO LEARNS TO DANCE


“You are a very nice, good, little bear, and I think you will soon
learn to dance,” said the man as he rubbed Dido on the head, and gave
him some water to drink, after Dido had eaten the bread. “Yes, I must
soon start teaching you to dance.”

Of course Dido did not understand this talk――that is not all of it, but
he knew the man was speaking kindly to him, for he could tell by the
way his voice sounded. Just as your dog can tell when you speak kindly
to him, or when you are cross. If you speak nicely to your dog, and
call him a good fellow, he will wag his tail, to show how glad he is.
But when you are cross――Oh! how the dog’s tail drops down between his
legs, and how sadly he looks up at you.

Of course Dido was not quite as tame as a dog, but he was beginning to
learn that the man would not hurt him, and that he would be kind to
him. So Dido thought he would be good himself, and not growl, bite or
scratch.

For two or three days more Dido was kept in the barn, being chained to
a post, with a leather collar around his neck. Dido did not like this
collar. He had never worn one before, and did not know what it was. In
the woods bears never wear collars, any more than they do neckties. Of
course, in a circus, a keeper, or trainer, might dress up a bear in
real clothes, with a collar and tie, just for fun.

Dido did not like the collar around his neck, and he pawed and
scratched, trying to get it off. It was fastened on too snugly,
however, and would not come loose.

“Let it alone, Dido,” said the man who was to be the little bear cub’s
keeper. “The collar will not hurt you, and I must keep it on so I can
lead you around by a chain, or rope, when we go traveling, and you show
the people how well you can dance.”

Dido did not understand all this talk, but when he found he could not
get the collar off he stopped trying to loosen it. And he very soon
found that, though it felt queer at first, it did not hurt him, just as
the man had said.

Every day Dido was given nice things to eat――big chunks of bread,
sometimes a bit of fish, and once he had a sweet bun with currants on
top. Oh! that was very good!

“Well, it isn’t so bad being caught in a trap,” thought Dido, after a
bit. “I have better things to eat here than I did in the den at home,
and I do not have to go after them. The man brings them to me. I guess
men are not as bad as my papa and mamma thought.”

Of course Dido’s keeper was good to him, for the man wanted to train
the little bear to dance, and you can not make wild animals learn
anything except by being kind to them. But I suppose all men might not
have been as good as the one who had caught Dido, so I guess the papa
and mamma bear were right in being afraid of men, and in teaching their
children bears to beware of the man-smell.

“Yes, I like it here very much,” thought Dido, as he walked around in
the barn as far as his chain would let him, and ate a bit of sweet
cracker which the man threw to him. “But I would like a swim in the
cold blue lake.”

Then he remembered his brothers, Gruffo and Muffo, and Dido was
lonesome and homesick. He wished very much that he might go back to
the woods again, and run about under the trees, and perhaps find a
honey-tree. If Dido had been a boy or girl I suppose he would have
cried, but bears do not know how to do that, which, perhaps, is just as
well. But, at any rate, Dido was lonesome, and most especially for the
blue lake, for he did want to swim so he might make himself nice and
clean.

And then, one day, Dido saw the big man and the little man bringing in
the barn a big tub. This they filled with water.

“Ha! Now the little bear can have a swim,” said the big man. “Jump in,
Dido, and have a bath.”

Dido smelled the water. He lapped up some with his red tongue, and,
though it was not quite as nice as the water of the blue lake high up
in the mountains, still it was very good.

“Wuff!” cried Dido, which was his way of saying “Fine!” and then into
the tub of water he jumped with a splash. Oh! how good it felt to be
washed!

“Now come out in the sun and dry yourself,” said the big man, and he
led Dido out of the barn by the chain. It was the first time Dido had
been out in the open air since he had been caught. He could feel the
warm wind blowing on him, he could see the sun and the green trees, for
there were trees near the trainer’s barn, though not so many as in the
woods.

Dido felt so jolly at being out in the air that he almost thought he
was back in his own forest again, and as he remembered Gruffo and
Muffo, and his father and mother, he wanted so much to see them that he
started to run.

“Oh, ho! You mustn’t do that!” said the big man, kindly. “I don’t want
you to run away from me!”

And Dido could not run away, for he was held fast by the collar about
his neck and the chain fastened to the collar. Dido ran as far as the
chain would let him, and then he came to such a sudden stop that he
turned a somersault, head over heels, as he used to do in front of the
rocky den, when his mother would laugh at him.

The man had fastened the chain to a post in the barnyard and Dido could
not get away. He felt a little choked and out of breath as he got up
from having turned the somersault, and he looked at the man in a queer
way, with his eyes partly shut.

“There, you see,” spoke the keeper. “You can’t get away, Dido, and you
might as well learn that first as last. I don’t want you to go away,
and I will be kind and good to you. I will feed you all you want to
eat, and you will have a nice place to sleep――just as nice as you had
in the woods. And when you learn to dance you and I will travel all
around the country, and the people will give me pennies to see you do
your tricks. So be a good little bear, and do not try to run away.”

[Illustration: Into the tub of water he jumped with a splash.]

Dido, even yet, did not know all the man said, of course, but the
little bear cub found he could not get away, so he sat down and looked
around. It was good to be out of doors, anyhow. Then the man moved a
sort of little house, like a dog kennel, up near Dido. This was for the
bear to sleep in nights, or go in out of the rain. The little house was
in the shade, but Dido’s chain was long enough so he could walk over in
the sun to get dry after his bath.

“Yes, I think I shall like it here,” said Dido to himself, in the way
bears have of talking. “I used to have lots of fun with my brothers in
the woods, but we never had as many nice things to eat as I have here,
and I have a little house all my own. Yes, I think I shall like it
here, and I will not run away from the man.”

Dido was getting very tame, you see.

Dido had been living out of doors for about a week, chained to a post,
going in his little house nights, and in that time several other men
came to look at him. They talked with Dido’s keeper, and one man told
about a big bear he had caught in the woods.

“My! I wonder if that could be my father or mother?” thought Dido, who,
by this time, could understand man-talk a little better. But there was
no way of knowing whether or not it was his father or mother who had
been caught.

One day Dido’s master brought out some sweet buns, and said:

“Now I think it is time you learned to dance. Come, Dido, let me see
if you know how. When I blow a tune on my horn lift up your paws and
dance around. Come now!”

The man loosed Dido’s chain from the post, and led the little bear cub
out into a nice grassy place, where the sun shone through the trees.
Then the keeper put a horn to his lips and blew a jolly tune on it. At
first Dido was a bit frightened at the music, but soon he found it was
not going to hurt him, and then he rather liked it. Nearly all animals
like music, though the way some dogs howl when you blow on a mouth
organ, or play a fiddle, is queer, I think. Perhaps the dogs think they
are singing.

Anyhow, Dido liked the horn-music which the man blew, but still Dido
did not know anything about dancing, although he stood up on his hind
legs.

“But I will teach you,” said the man.

He tied one string on Dido’s left hind leg, and another string on his
right leg. Then the man called to two boys to help him.

“Now when I blow the horn,” said the man, “first pull on one string
and then on the other. That will pull Dido’s legs a little, and soon
he will know that he must lift them up, first one, then the other. And
pretty soon he will learn to do it without any strings――just by hearing
the music.”

The man again blew on his horn, but Dido did not dance. Then the
little bear cub felt a pull on his left hind leg, as he was standing up
straight, for he did not have to be taught to do this. And of course
when Dido felt the pull on his leg he lifted it up.

“That’s the way!” cried the man, and he tooted a merry tune. “Now pull
the other string, boy!”

The boy did, and Dido lifted up his other leg. Then came a pull on the
one he had lifted before, and soon Dido was lifting first one hind leg,
and then the other, going around in a circle as the man gently pulled
him by the chain fastened to the collar.

All this while the man played music on the horn, and Dido liked it more
and more. Soon he noticed that as the music went fast he was lifting
his legs more quickly, and when the music played slowly his legs went
slowly, too, the boys pulling the strings that way.

“He will learn to dance in a little while,” said the keeper.

For about an hour Dido had to lift first one foot then the other as the
strings were pulled and the music played. Then he was allowed to rest
and given a lump of sugar.

“Oh! how good that is!” thought Dido. “It is almost as nice as honey!”

The next day Dido practiced his dancing again, with the strings on
his legs. But this time he did better. And, at the end of his lesson,
he was given more sugar. Soon Dido learned to know that when the horn
played and his keeper cried “Dance!” that he must get up on his hind
legs and circle around, lifting first one foot and then the other. And
each time he danced Dido was given a lump of sugar.

And, finally, one day the man did not put the strings to Dido’s legs.
He just led the little bear out by the chain, and blew the horn.

“Dance, Dido! Dance!” cried the man, playing jolly music.

And Dido danced, all by himself, and he liked it, too, for the music
seemed to make him happy.

“Ah!” cried the man, “my little bear has learned to dance! Soon we will
go traveling over the world together.”




CHAPTER V

DIDO CROSSES THE OCEAN


Every day, and sometimes two and three times a day, Dido’s keeper would
come out to him with the horn, and make the little bear dance. And
sometimes Dido grew tired. Then the man would give him a sweet bun, or
a lump of sugar, and Dido could rest in the shade, or take a nice bath
in the tub of water.

Dido was growing to like to dance, for it was something like the tricks
he and his brothers used to do in the woods, though they never called
it dancing. They would find a loose, dangling branch of a tree and
stand up on their hind legs to knock it about with their front paws.
And sometimes when the branch would sway to and fro the bear cubs
would have to jump quickly about to reach it. And that, in a way, was
something like dancing.

So, after all, dancing is not so very hard for a bear to learn. They
seem to like it, and Dido certainly liked the good things he had to eat
after each lesson. So now, whenever he heard the man play a tune on the
shiny brass horn, Dido would stand up and dance.

“I think it is time you learned other tricks,” the man said one day.
“I must teach you how to climb a tree and how to stand on your head,
how to turn somersaults, and how to play soldier. But you can not learn
all of them at once. We will begin on climbing a tree, for that will be
easy for you.”

Of course the man knew Dido could climb a tree, as all bears can do
that just as cats can. Their claws are sharp, though not quite as sharp
as are pussies’, and they can stick in the soft bark of a tree. Dogs’
claws are not sharp, so that is why they can not climb trees.

“Come, Dido, go up in the tree,” said the keeper one day, as he
fastened a longer chain on the bear’s collar. “Go up in the tree,” and
he led Dido to one.

But Dido did not climb up. He would have done so if he had known what
the man wanted, but Dido did not know just what the words meant. He
saw the tree, and he knew he could climb it, as he had often done in
the woods at home, but just then he did not feel like climbing a tree.
Perhaps he thought his chain was too short, and he might get a pull
that would make him fall.

“Ah, I shall have to give you a little lesson,” said the man. “Here,
boy!” he called, and a boy came with a big sweet bun, which he put on
a high branch of the tree, climbing up a ladder to do it.

“Now, Dido, go get the bun! Go up in the tree and get the bun,” called
the man. Dido could smell the bun, for he had a very sharp nose. And he
wanted the bun so much, the little bear cub did, that he climbed right
up the tree and got it.

“Ha!” cried the man. “That’s the way to do it! I knew you could climb
a tree, but you must do it when I tell you to, so as not to keep the
people waiting when we begin our travels, and go all over the world.
You will not find a bun up a tree every time I ask you to climb it,
Dido,” said the bear’s keeper, “but I will always give you a treat when
you have finished your tricks. Now come down, Dido!”

But Dido sat on the limb of the tree, eating the bun. It tasted so good
he did not want to come down until he had finished it. Then he felt a
pull on the chain that was fast to his collar.

“Come down, Dido! Come down!” called the man, and he pulled so hard on
the chain that Dido nearly fell. Then the bear knew what was wanted of
him, and down he climbed. But he had eaten the bun.

“Now we must do it again,” the keeper said. “Boy, put another bun up in
the tree for Dido.”

So the boy did, and Dido climbed up and got that bun. Each time the
man played a tune on the shiny brass horn, and it was a different tune
from the one he played for Dido to dance. And, in a little while, Dido
learned to climb up the tree whenever he heard this tune, and when the
man told him to go up, whether there was a bun in the tree or not.

You see Dido did not have to learn _how_ to climb a tree, for he knew
that already. What he had to learn was to do it _when_ the man wanted
him to, and soon he did.

Dido could now do two tricks, if you call climbing a tree a trick.
Dancing, I think, might really be called a trick for a bear, though men
and women, as well as boys and girls, dance and do not think it a trick
at all――that is, unless they are learning some new, fancy steps.

“Dido, you are a good little bear,” said the man, as the little cub
came down out of the tree after having climbed up. “I wonder if you
will learn to march like a soldier, and turn a somersault as easily as
you learned to dance and climb a tree?”

Had the man only known it, Dido did not have to be taught to turn
somersaults, for the little cub had often done this in the woods. But
what Dido did have to learn was to turn a somersault when the man told
him to.

It took a little longer for Dido to learn these two new tricks――marching
like a soldier, and turning head over heels. But finally he did. His
keeper was good and kind, and gave him nice things to eat, and Dido did
his best to please the man.

At last came the day when Dido could take a stick in his paws, hold it
straight up in the air, or over his shoulder, as a soldier holds his
gun, and walk around while the man played a marching tune on the shiny
brass horn.

Then the little bear cub learned to turn somersaults, or, rather, he
learned to do it whenever the man asked him to, and when the man played
a certain tune on the horn. But Dido could not stand on his head. The
man tried to get him to do this, but Dido’s hind legs were so heavy
that whenever he stood on his head, with his front feet down on the
ground, he would fall over in a heap.

“I guess we won’t try that trick,” the man said. “It is too hard for
you, Dido. We will make up an easier one.”

Dido could now dance, turn somersaults, march like a soldier, and climb
a tree or a telegraph pole. Only there were no telegraph poles in the
mountains, though soon Dido was to see some.

Four tricks are quite a number for a little bear cub to do, I think,
even though some of them were easy.

“We must now begin to think of traveling,” said the man one day. “Yes,
Dido, we will soon start on our travel around the world, over to a new
country called the United States of America. That is a new country for
me, and it will be a new one for you. The people over there have lots
of money, and they will give me pennies when you do your tricks. With
the pennies I can buy things to eat for me and for you. Yes, soon we
shall sail over the ocean in a big ship and go to America.”

Of course Dido did not know what all this talk meant, but he saw his
master smiling, and the man seemed happy, so Dido was glad, for the
keeper was kind to him.

A few days after this Dido’s keeper gave him a nice dinner of bread,
fish and sweet buns. Dido saw that the man had a big bundle strapped
over his back, while on one shoulder was the shiny tooting horn. In one
hand the man had a long stick, with which Dido marched when he did his
shoulder trick.

“Come, Dido!” called the man, “we are now going to start on our
travels. We will march through my country until we come to the ocean,
and there we will take a ship. And on the way you shall do your tricks,
and the people will give us money so we can buy things to eat.”

So Dido and his master started down the mountain. At first the bear
cub, who had grown much larger, felt sad at going away from the woods
where he had always lived. He could look back and see them and he knew
the blue lake was there, and perhaps his brothers and father and mother
were swimming in it.

“Oh, I wonder if I will ever see them again?” thought Dido.

He never did, but then Dido had so many adventures, and saw so many
new and strange sights, that he soon forgot all about his bear-folks.
That’s the way it is with wild animals, you know. And I must tell you
that Dido’s father and mother, and his brothers Gruffo and Muffo, tried
very hard to find him.

They went looking for him that same day Dido went off to search for the
honey-tree. But all Mr. Bear could find was the place where the trap
had been set, with the honey in it.

“I guess poor Dido is gone,” said Mr. Bear to his wife.

“Oh dear!” cried Dido’s mother. “Do you think a man will eat him?”

“Let us hope not,” said Mr. Bear. “Dido was caught in a trap. Well, I
told him to be careful of them, but he did not mind. It is too late
now. Perhaps he is happier where he is.”

And Dido was quite happy. His father and mother, soon after that, had
to find another den to live in, because the animal trappers began
searching through the mountains for wild creatures, and in a little
while Dido was forgotten by his folks, who had troubles of their own to
keep away from the hunters.

Down the mountain went Dido and his keeper. Soon they came to a little
town, or village. Dido did not know what it was, but he saw many
houses, which were larger than the den he had lived in among the rocks,
and he saw many men, like his kind keeper, and women and boys and girls.

When Dido’s keeper led him through the village streets the boys and
girls crowded about to see the bear.

“Now, Dido,” said the man, “you shall dance for them.”

Then the man played a tooting tune on his horn and Dido danced as he
had been taught to do. Around and around he went, first lifting up one
foot, then the other, the horn playing all the while.

“Good, Dido! Good!” said the man.

The children clapped their hands and laughed, and the older folks
tossed money into the hat of the keeper as he passed it around.

“Now march like a soldier!” said the man, and Dido did. Then the bear
climbed a tree, and turned a somersault, and the children laughed
louder than before, and clapped their hands harder.

“What a funny dancing bear!” cried a little girl.

“I wish we had him for a pet,” said a little boy.

“Ah, ha! I cannot give away my dancing bear,” said the man. “He and I
are going to a far country.”

For many days Dido traveled with the man, walking from town to town,
sometimes to big cities. At night the man would take a blanket from
the bundle on his back, roll himself up in it and go to sleep under a
haystack or a bush. He would tie Dido to a tree, and the bear would go
to sleep, too. Only Dido did not have to wrap himself up in a blanket,
as he had a big, thick warm overcoat of fur. This was in the summer
time, when it was not too cold for the man to sleep out of doors.

With the money which the people tossed into the hat after they had
watched the dancing bear, the man would buy things to eat for himself
and for Dido. And thus they traveled on and on until finally they came
to the seashore.

“Now we will take a ship and go across the ocean,” said the man.

Dido did not know what the ocean was, but he saw a lot of water, much
more than was in the blue mountain lake. But it was not the same kind.
For, when Dido lapped up some with his red tongue, the water was salty.

“Wuff! I do not like that water!” said Dido to himself.

Dido’s master led him through a long shed and up on the ship. Of course
Dido did not know what a ship was, but soon he found himself in a
little room with his keeper and he knew it was all right. So Dido went
to sleep.

When he awakened he felt himself swaying up and down as he had often
swayed when in the top of a tree.

“This is queer,” thought Dido. “I am not in a tree, but I am going up
and down. What makes it?”

It was a ship, you see, tossing on the ocean waves. In about a week
Dido and his master had crossed the ocean and were in America. The
ship reached the big city of New York, and Dido was ready for many new
adventures.




CHAPTER VI

DIDO IN THE COUNTRY


New York is a big city, and it is not a place where bears live, except
in Central Park, or Bronx Park, where there are many wild animals in
cages or dens. And it was to New York that Dido had come with his
keeper.

On the ship Dido had had some adventures, and I wish I had space enough
in this book to tell you about what happened to him. But I think,
perhaps, you would rather hear about Dido’s adventures as he traveled
about the country and cities, dancing, turning somersaults, and
climbing trees and telegraph poles.

So I will just say that on the ship Dido did a few tricks for the
passengers on deck when the weather was fine. When it was stormy Dido
and his keeper had to stay down in their room. And Dido had all he
wanted to eat.

For there were on that ship many children, and when they heard that
Dido, the dancing bear, was also a passenger they gave him some of
their buns, apples and other good things. So Dido had a happy time.

Once there was a big storm, and the ship almost turned a somersault, as
Dido himself had done in the woods. But the storm passed, the sun came
out, and the ocean grew quiet. Then Dido felt better.

Now he was in New York with his keeper. As I have told you, a big city
is not a good place for a bear to live. Of course there is enough for
him to eat, if he can get it, but there are not many trees, except in
the streets, and policemen don’t like to see bears climbing the city
trees. And in a city there are no lakes of blue water, in which bears
may swim.

But Dido’s master took him to a stable where there were many horses,
and here Dido felt quite at home, though at first the horses were
frightened when they smelled the bear. For horses smell in much the
same way as do bears. If you have ever held out an apple, or a lump
of sugar, to a horse you have seen him smell it before he tasted it.
All animals do this. They can often smell better than they can see,
and they tell, in that way, whether a thing is good for them to eat.
So when the horses smelled Dido, the dancing bear, they were a bit
frightened, as they were not used to wild animals, and they thought
Dido was wild. But when they saw him do some of his tricks, which he
did for practice in the barn, the horses were afraid no more.

“We will stay in this stable a little while,” said Dido’s master to
him, “and then we will go out in the country, and people will give us
money when you dance.”

One day Dido’s keeper went out and stayed a long time. When he came
back he was very happy.

“Ah, Dido!” cried the man, “we are going to a circus. You are going
to do some tricks there. We shall have a good time, and I will get
money to buy buns for you. After the circus we will go out in the nice
country, where the trees grow as they do on the mountain where I caught
you.”

Dido did not know what a circus was, but he soon found out.

In New York City is a place called Madison Square Garden. It is a big
building, and on top of the tower, where the pigeons live, is a statue
of a golden lady, with a bow and arrow. The lady is named Diana, and,
many, many years ago, she used to hunt wild animals in the woods of her
country. Perhaps that is why they have the circus in Madison Square
Garden.

A circus there is not like one in a tent. All the animals and all the
performers are in one big building. The animals are mostly down in the
basement, as they call it.

And it was there that Dido was taken by his keeper. The dancing bear
rode in a big express wagon, just as he had ridden down the mountain
after he had been caught in the trap-cage. Only this time Dido was not
afraid, as his kind keeper was with him to pat him on the head and give
him sweet buns.

Dido was taken into Madison Square Garden, and as soon as he got inside
he smelled the smell of many wild animals. He was not afraid, for he
was used to that smell. He could tell there were other bears in the
circus, and he saw them in cages, but none of them were let go about as
was he.

And Dido saw camels, lions, tigers, monkeys, ponies, horses, and many
other animals.

Dido’s master led him down where the animals were kept, and chained him
to a post, with some water near by for him to drink, and some bread and
buns to eat.

“I am going away for a little while, Dido,” the man said. “But I will
soon be back. Then we will go up in the circus ring and you will do
your tricks for the boys and girls. Be a good bear while I am away.”

Dido ate a bun, drank some water, and looked about him. Over in one
corner the dancing bear saw a queer animal, who seemed to have two
tails.

“I beg your pardon, but who are you?” asked Dido, in the sort of talk
that all animals understand.

“Who am I?” asked the big animal who seemed to have two tails. “Why I
am Tum Tum, the jolly elephant.”

“Tum Tum, eh?” exclaimed Dido. “That is a nice name, but you are a
funny chap, with two tails.”

“Ah, that is where you make a mistake,” said Tum Tum, as he chewed a
mouthful of hay. “I have only one tail. The other is my trunk that I
lift things with. It is really only a long nose, for I breathe through
it, but folks call it a trunk.”

“Ah, I see,” spoke Dido. “I am sorry I thought you had two tails.”

“Oh, that’s all right,” went on jolly Tum Tum. “Don thought the same
thing when he first saw me.”

“Don? Who is Don?” asked Dido.

“Don is a runaway dog. That is, he once ran away,” explained the
elephant, reaching for a peanut which a boy held out to him. “But Don
is home now after his many adventures.”

“What are adventures?” asked Dido.

“Things that happen to you,” answered Tum Tum. “I had many adventures,
and so did Don. A man wrote a book about each of us.”

“What is a book?” asked Dido.

“Oh, don’t ask me,” said Tum Tum. “All I know is that’s what they
called it. A book is a queer thing. It is square, like a loaf of
bread, but not so thick――at least the books about Don and me were not
so thick. And inside the book are thin pieces of something they call
pages, or leaves, though they are not green like the leaves of a tree.
The leaves in the book are white and on them are funny black marks. And
when boys and girls look at the funny black marks, which tell about Don
and me, they laugh, those boys and girls do, for I have heard them say
so when they come here to the circus to see me.”

“I wonder if my adventures will ever be put in a book?” asked Dido.

“Maybe so,” answered Tum Tum, the jolly elephant. “Have you had many
things happen to you?”

“Oh, lots and lots!” cried the dancing bear. “I used to live in the
woods, and I went in a box to get some honey and I found myself in a
trap.”

“That was an adventure,” said Tum Tum, “so I think you will be put in a
book.”

Dido was very glad to meet the jolly elephant, and the two talked
together for some time. Then Tum Tum had to go up in the circus ring to
do his tricks, and, a little later, Dido’s master came for him.

“Come, Dido,” said the man. “You are going to show the people what you
can do. I want you to dance, to turn somersaults, and to march like a
soldier.

“There are no trees for you to climb, but there is a big post in the
circus ring, and you can climb that, I’m sure. I’ll give you a bun if
you do.”

And Dido did climb the pole, and he did his other tricks, so that
the people in the circus, especially the boys and girls, laughed and
clapped their hands to see Dido, the dancing bear, and Tum Tum, the
jolly elephant.

Then one day Dido’s keeper said to him:

“Come, Dido, the circus is going to move away from New York, so we will
move, too. Only we will go out in the country by ourselves, and we will
travel along so you can do your tricks, and I can gather the pennies in
my hat.”

The next day Dido and his keeper rode out in the country in a railroad
train. Dido slept in a corner of a baggage car, where the trunks were.
He liked the train better than the ocean ship, for it did not go up and
down so much, though it moved faster.

“Ah, here we are in the country!” cried Dido’s keeper, as he led him
out of the car.

“And now, I suppose,” thought Dido, “I will have some more adventures,
and they may be put into a book, as Tum Tum’s were.”

[Illustration: Dido, the dancing bear and Tum Tum, the jolly elephant.]




CHAPTER VII

DIDO MEETS DON


Dido, the dancing bear, looked about him as he stepped down out of the
railroad car. The train had stopped at a small country station, and
when some men and boys, who were waiting on the platform, saw the bear
they crowded up close to have a better look at him.

“Say, he’s a big fellow!” said one boy, not coming too close.

“Will he bite?” asked another.

“No, Dido is a good bear. He will not bite,” the keeper answered. “He
can do many tricks.”

Dido felt proud and happy when he heard this, for he was now able to
understand much that his master said. And Dido was really growing to
be a big bear. He was not a little bear cub any longer, but quite fat.
For he had good things to eat, and he did not have to travel over the
mountain to get them.

“Please make your bear do some tricks,” said a man to the keeper, whose
name, I have forgotten to tell you, was George. “Make the bear do some
funny tricks.”

“Will you give me pennies if I do?” George asked. “I need the pennies
to buy things for Dido and me to eat.”

“Go ahead and have the bear do tricks, and we’ll give you pennies,”
another man said with a smile.

So George, the dancing bear’s trainer, led Dido back of the railroad
station, where there was a nice, shady, grassy spot. Dido looked all
around and he saw that they were indeed in the country. There were
only a few houses here and there, and afar off he could see woods and
mountains, almost like those in his own land. Dido sniffed the air.
It was pure and sweet, much nicer than the air in New York, or in any
city, Dido thought.

“I am going to like it in the country, I’m sure,” said the bear to
himself. “But I wish my adventures would begin so they could be put in
a book. I wonder who will do it?”

Of course Dido had had some adventures, though perhaps he did not know
it, and he was going to have more, and I have put them in this book,
though I don’t believe Dido knows me. I have often seen him, however,
and fed him buns.

“Come now, Dido, get ready to do some tricks!” called George. “You are
going to dance for the people. Dance nice now!”

Then the man played a tooting tune on his brass horn.

“Toodle-de-doodle-de-do!” played the man, and when Dido heard that
music he knew it was the kind to which he danced. So he stood up on his
hind legs, held his fore paws limply out in front of him, and began to
lift first one foot and then the other, going around and around, just
like a person waltzing.

“That’s it, Dido! That’s the way to do it!” cried his keeper. “Dance
for the people!” And he played a faster tune on the brass horn, so that
Dido got quite dizzy from going around so fast. But the man did not
make him do this very long.

“Good! Good!” cried the people who stood in a ring around Dido as he
danced. “That was fine!”

“Did you like it?” asked George. “I am glad, and Dido is glad, too;
aren’t you, Dido?” and reaching in the bag which he carried over his
shoulder the man gave Dido a sweet bun.

Dido was glad to get that, whether or not he was glad to dance. But I
think he liked dancing, too, for bears seem to be fond of going about
doing their little tricks.

“Can your bear do anything else?” asked a lady in the crowd.

“Many more things,” answered George. “He will now play he is a soldier.
Hi, Dido! March like a soldier! Here is your gun!” and he tossed Dido
the stick which was carried along, just to be used in this trick.

Dido stood up as straight as he could, and held the stick in his paw,
up over his shoulder.

“Good, Dido!” cried George. “Now what do you do when you meet an
officer?”

Dido raised his other paw and touched his head, making what is called a
salute, which soldiers always give their officers when they meet.

“Now march, Dido!” cried George, and as he played a marching tune on
the brass horn Dido marched around, carrying the stick for a gun.

The people clapped their hands at that, and when the keeper passed
around his hat many cents and some dimes jingled into it, to buy more
buns for Dido, and other things for the keeper to eat.

“Make him do some more tricks, please,” begged a boy in the crowd. “I
have another penny.”

“Ha! Very good!” cried George. “Dido, shall we do some more tricks for
the little boy who has a penny?” Then George made believe whisper that
question in Dido’s ear, and next the man pretended to put his ear down
to Dido’s mouth as if to listen for an answer.

“Yes, Dido says he will do another trick for you,” said the man,
laughing.

Of course Dido did not really speak to his trainer, for though a bear,
a dog or other animals can understand much that is said to them they
can not answer back. But the man just pretended Dido did answer so as
to make a little fun, and the people laughed.

“Now, Dido, do your somersault trick,” said George. “All ready!”

He blew a sharp blast on the horn, and Dido leaned down, put his head
on the ground, kicked his hind legs up in the air, and over he went,
turning a somersault just as some fat little boy might do it on the
soft, green grass.

“Another, Dido! Turn another somersault!” cried George, and over went
Dido again, while the people laughed. Then Dido stood up straight once
more, and saluted like a soldier.

“Did you like that trick, little boy?” asked George.

“Very much,” the little boy answered. “And here is my penny,” and he
tossed it into the man’s hat.

“Now for a last trick, and then we will travel on farther into the
country,” said Dido’s master. “Do the tree-climbing trick, Dido. Only
instead of a tree you will climb a telegraph pole.”

There was a pole near the railroad depot, and soon Dido was going up
this, sticking his sharp claws in the wood. Up and up he went, nearly
to the top, as far as his chain would let him, the man holding the end
of it.

“That’s far enough――come on down, Dido!” called the man, and Dido came
down. He was given another bun to eat, and after this he drank some
water from a fountain near the depot.

Dido and George traveled on into the green country. A few boys followed
them a little way, for some of them had never seen a bear before.
But soon the boys grew tired, and Dido and his master were left to
themselves.

“We will go to a quiet place in the woods and sleep,” said George, and
Dido was glad of this, for he wanted to cool off and get quiet after
his ride in the train and doing his tricks.

In the afternoon, when they had had a good sleep, the dancing bear and
his keeper traveled on again. Soon they came to another town, and there
Dido did his tricks over once more, and the man gathered money in his
hat. And here Dido’s master met a man from his own country, far over
the sea. The two men were glad to see one another, and talked much in
their own language.

“Will you not come along with Dido and me?” asked George of this man,
whose name was Tom. “We can travel together, and you can blow the horn
while I make Dido do tricks. Come, travel about the country with us.”

“Yes, I will do that,” Tom said, and so all three started off together.
Dido liked Tom very much, for Tom gave the dancing bear some sweet
popcorn balls, of which Dido was very fond.

For a week or more Dido traveled about with George and Tom, doing
tricks, sometimes in little country towns, and again in cities. And one
day, when they were out in the country, Dido had a little adventure.

They were marching along the road, when Dido saw, coming toward them an
automobile, with a man on the front seat steering, while in back were a
boy and a girl, and two dogs.

All at once there was a loud banging noise, like a gun. But it was not
a gun. One of the automobile tires had burst. Then the man jumped out
to fix a new tire on the wheels, and the boy and girl, with the two
dogs, got out to rest in the shade.

Tom blew a little music on the horn, and this made the boy and girl
look down the road.

“Oh, look!” cried the girl, whose name was Alice. “What is that? A
bear! I’m afraid!”

“Don’t be afraid,” said the boy, whose name was Bob. “It is only a
tame, trained bear.”

The two dogs barked at the bear, and then Dido, who, with the two men,
had come closer to the automobile, said:

“Don’t be afraid of me, doggies. I won’t hurt any one. I am only going
to do some tricks.”

“Can your bear do tricks?” asked the boy of George.

“He surely can,” answered Dido’s keeper, and Dido turned somersaults,
marched around like a soldier, and climbed a telegraph pole.

“It certainly is a good trick,” said one dog. “I can do some myself,
but I can’t climb telegraph poles. What is your name, dancing bear?” he
asked.

“My name is Dido. What’s yours?”

“My name is Don,” said the dog, “and this is my friend Rex,” and he
waved his tail at the other dog.

“What! Is your name Don?” cried Dido in surprise. “Why I have heard
about you!”

“Who from?” asked Don.

“From Tum Tum.”

“What! That jolly elephant in the circus?” asked Don, himself quite
excited now.

“That’s the one,” answered Dido. “I was in the circus a little while
when it showed in Madison Square Garden, in New York, and there I met
Tum Tum. He spoke about you, and said you had had many adventures.”

“So I have,” Don said. “I am a runaway dog, that is, I once was, and
there is a book telling all about me,” he added, proudly.




CHAPTER VIII

DIDO HELPS A GIRL


“See how friendly our dogs are with the dancing bear,” said Alice, the
girl, to Bob, the boy.

“Our bear is very good and tame, and he likes good dogs,” spoke George.

“Where did you get him?” asked the boy, for the automobile tire was not
yet fixed, and they still had to wait beside the country road.

“I caught Dido on top of a mountain, in the woods, in a far country,”
said the man. “I put some honey in a box and when he went in to get it
the door fell shut and he could not get out. Then I trained him, and
brought him to this country. He was a little fellow then, and he used
to growl at me, but now he likes me, I think, for I try to be kind to
him.”

“Yes, I do like you,” said Dido to himself. “He is good to me,” he
added, speaking to the two dogs.

For though Dido, Don and Rex could understand most of the talk that
went on, they themselves could not speak to the men, or to the boy or
girl. Then the man told the boy and girl how Dido had learned to dance,
just as I have told you in the first part of this book.

“Did it all happen that way?” asked Don, of Dido, for the dogs and bear
were resting in the shade now.

“That’s just the way it happened,” Dido said. “I lived in the woods
with my father and mother, and my brothers Gruffo and Muffo. But I like
it here now better than in the woods.”

“And how is Tum Tum, the jolly elephant?” asked Don.

“Very well,” answered Dido, “and as fond of peanuts as ever.”

“Yes, he always did like them,” barked Don, “but, as for me, I never
could see much in them. The shells get in my teeth.”

“Tum Tum eats them, shells and all,” Dido said.

“Well, remember me to him when next you see him,” went on the dog who
had once run away. “Tell him I would like to see him again.”

“I shall,” Dido promised, “though I don’t know when I may meet him
again. He is in the circus, you know, and I am traveling about the
country. Still I may see him.”

By this time the automobile tire was mended and the man called to the
boy and girl to get in.

“That means we shall have to go also,” said Don. “Well, good-by, Dido.
I am glad to have met you.”

“And so am I,” said Rex, the other dog. Then they rubbed noses
together, which is a sort of way animals have of shaking hands, I
suppose; and then they parted.

“Don’t forget to tell Tum Tum what I told you!” barked Don, with a wag
of his tail, as he jumped up with the boy and girl.

“I’ll not,” promised Dido, waving his paw at the two dogs.

Then the automobile puffed away and Tom and George led Dido down the
country road, now and then stopping in front of a house to blow a tune
on the brass horn, so Dido could do his tricks.

That night it rained, so the two men with the dancing bear could not
sleep out in the woods. They looked around until they found a barn, and
they asked the farmer if they might sleep in that.

“If you will kindly let us,” said George, “we will make our bear do
tricks for you, and you will not need to give us any money in the hat.”

“Very well,” the farmer said; “you and Dido may sleep on the hay in my
barn. And I will give you something to eat, though I do not know what
bears like.”

“He likes buns especially,” said George, “and I have none for him in my
bag. He ate the last one this noon, and since then we have not come to
a bakery where I could buy more.”

“Likes buns, does he?” asked the farmer’s wife. “Well, I have some, but
they have raisins in. Do you think Dido would not like them on that
account?”

“Raisins in the buns!” cried George, making a low bow. “Why he will
like them all the better on that account. The buns I give him only have
little currants in. He will like raisins very much better indeed.”

And Dido did. He thought he had never tasted such good buns as those
the farmer’s wife gave him. And Dido did all his tricks in the barn
that night, safe and dry from the rain. The farmer and his wife, the
hired man and some boys and girls, came from nearby houses to watch
Dido do his tricks, and no one had to give a cent because the farmer
had been kind to the men, and the farmer’s nice wife had been very good
to Dido.

The next morning the sun shone, for the rain had stopped, and after
Dido had taken a bath, in the big trough where the farm horses drank,
he and his two masters started off down the country road again, having
had a good breakfast.

The farmer’s wife gave George more raisin-buns to put in his bag for
Dido, and the dancing bear was very glad when he saw them.

“I shall not be hungry to-day,” said Dido to himself.

That day they passed through two or three small towns, and Dido did his
tricks several times, so that the hat of George had quite some money in
it. And that night the men and their trained bear slept in the woods,
with moss for a bed and the blankets they carried with them for covers.
Dido’s fur was _his_ blanket.

Dido awakened early the next morning, before either of the men. He
looked at them sleeping near him, and then he rolled over on the bed of
moss, stretched his strong legs, scratched with his claws on the soft
ground and opened his mouth to stretch that in a big yawn.

Then Dido stood up, and he saw that during the night the chain, which
George always used to fasten him to a tree, had come loose.

“Why, I could run away if I wanted to,” thought Dido. “I could slip off
in the woods and run away, as Don, the dog, did. Only I won’t. George
would feel badly, and, besides, I might not be able to get anything to
eat. These woods may not be like the woods on the mountain where I used
to live. I guess I will not run away. I will just walk down to that
little brook and get a drink.”

Not far from where the men and bear had slept that night was a nice
brook, bubbling over green, mossy stones. Dido went down to the bank of
it, and, as he was getting a drink, he saw some fish swimming about.

“Ha! Fish!” said Dido to himself. “That’s good. Here is my breakfast
all ready and waiting for me――if I can catch one.”

The dancing bear leaned over the water as his father and mother had
taught him to do. He had not forgotten. Dido waited. Pretty soon he
saw, swimming along, a big, shiny fish.

“Ah, ha!” thought Dido. “I guess I can get you!”

Down he scooped with his paw, getting his claws under the fish, and out
of the water he lifted him.

“Oh, look!” cried Tom, awakening just in time to see Dido toss the fish
out on the bank. “What is our bear doing?”

“He is getting his breakfast,” answered George. “Wild bears often catch
fish that way. But this is the first time I ever saw Dido do it. I wish
he would catch some for us.”

And Dido did, though he did not know he was catching fish for his
masters. He thought they would all be for him. But Dido pulled out of
the brook more fish than he really needed, and Tom and George built a
fire and cooked some for themselves. Dido did not bother about a fire.
He was afraid of a blaze, as all animals are.

After their breakfast in the woods, Dido and his masters marched on
again. Whenever they came to a village Tom would blow on the brass
horn, and Dido would dance around, turn somersaults, march like a
soldier and climb a tree or telegraph pole. The people liked to see
this last more than anything else, and Dido liked to climb, for he was
used to that. He really liked it better than turning somersaults, for
much dust got in his thick fur when he got down and rolled over on the
ground.

Dido was a clean bear, and whenever he became dusty and dirty he wanted
a bath. And whenever they came to a lake or stream of water Dido was
allowed to go in, and splash about as much as he pleased.

One hot afternoon Dido was asleep in the woods with the two men. They
had performed the tricks in one village, and were going on to another,
taking a rest in between.

Once again Dido awakened to find his two masters asleep, but this time
the chain was still fast to a tree, so Dido could not wander very far.
He got up and walked about, and, as he did so he heard, off through the
woods, the barking of a dog, and then a scream.

[Illustration: Just as the dog was going to jump Dido stepped in
between them.]

All at once Dido saw a girl running along the path in the woods, and
behind the girl came a big black dog, barking angrily, and trying to
catch the girl.

“Oh, stop him! Somebody please stop him!” screamed the girl. “He is a
bad dog and wants to bite me!”

Of course Dido did not know all the girl said, but he could see that
the dog was angry and had sharp teeth. He might bite the girl, though
why any dog should want to bite such a nice girl Dido could not tell.

“Don’t let him get me!” begged the girl, and she ran toward Dido and
the two men, who were now awake.

“Here!” cried Dido to the bad dog in animal language. “You let that
girl alone!”

“No, I’ll not!” barked the dog. “I am going to bite her!”

“Oh, no, you’re not!” said Dido, and he growled now, for he did not
like this kind of a dog. Then, just as the dog was going to jump at the
girl, Dido stepped in between them, and, with one sweep of his big paw,
the dancing bear knocked the dog to one side, so that he rolled over
and over in the leaves.

“There! Now I guess you’ll let little girls alone!” said Dido, standing
ready to knock the dog away again if he sprang at the girl.




CHAPTER IX

DIDO IN THE BAKERY


“Don’t be afraid, little girl, we won’t let the bad dog hurt you,” said
the man named George. “Whose dog is he?”

“He――he belongs to a tin peddler,” said the little girl. “I was walking
along the road just now and a boy, behind me, threw a stone at the dog.
I guess the dog must have thought I threw it, for he chased after me,
and I ran, for I was afraid he would bite me.”

“I guess he would have, if he had caught you,” remarked Tom. “But Dido
knocked him out of the way.”

“Is Dido the name of your bear?” asked the girl.

“Yes,” answered George. “Dido is our bear.”

“It’s a pretty name,” said the little girl.

Dido, who was watching to see if the dog would get up and run at the
little girl again, wondered what her name was.

“So she likes my name,” said Dido to himself. “I wonder if she likes
me?”

The bad dog got up from the pile of leaves where Dido had knocked him.
He growled, deep down in his throat, and Dido called:

“Be careful! Don’t try any of your bad tricks around here. Are you
going to bite this little girl?”

“No, I am not,” said the dog. “I guess I made a mistake. I thought she
threw a stone at me, but perhaps she did not.”

“She doesn’t look like a girl who would throw stones at a dog or a
bear,” Dido said. “You had better let her alone and go back where you
belong.”

“I will,” said the dog, limping as he went away. “I am sorry I chased
after her.”

“And I am sorry I had to hit you so hard with my paw,” spoke the
dancing bear. “But it was the only way to stop you from jumping on the
little girl.”

“Yes, I suppose so. You made me a little lame, but I guess that could
not be helped. It was my own fault, but I surely thought she threw a
stone at me. Good-by, Mr. Bear.”

“Good-by, Mr. Dog,” answered Dido. “Next time we meet we shall be
friends.”

“I hope so,” spoke the dog, limping away.

“Oh, I am so glad he is gone!” the little girl said. “I was afraid of
him.”

“Where do you live?” asked Tom, for of course the little girl could
not talk to the bear.

“Just down the road, but I have to go past that dog to get to my
house,” she answered. “I am afraid.”

“Never mind. We’ll walk with you,” said George, “and then the dog won’t
come near you.”

Of course neither the men nor the little girl knew that the peddler’s
dog had promised to be good. They had seen Dido and the dog close
together, but they did not know of what they were talking.

“You are not afraid of our bear, are you?” asked Tom, as he picked up
the brass horn from where it had fallen in the moss as he slept.

“Oh, no, I’m not a bit afraid of him,” answered the little girl,
looking at Dido. “He seems a nice, gentle bear.”

“He is,” said George. “Would you like to see him do some tricks?”

“Oh, very much!” cried the little girl, clapping her hands. “Will he do
some tricks for me?”

“I guess so,” answered George with a laugh. “Do some tricks for the
little girl you saved from the dog, Dido. Play a tune, Tom!”

So Tom played a tune on the brass horn, and Dido danced there in the
woods, with only the little girl for an audience. But Dido did his
best, even though there was only one person to look on, besides Tom and
George.

“Oh, what a funny trick!” laughed the little girl, whose name was Rose,
as she saw Dido turn a somersault. Dido did not mind turning head over
heels in the woods, for he could do it on the soft green moss, and his
fur did not get full of dust.

“Now we will walk down the road to your home,” said George to the
little girl. “Then you will not be afraid of the dog.”

But when they went out in the country road the peddler’s wagon was
gone, and the dog was not in sight.

“There’s my house,” said the little girl, pointing to a white one down
the highway.

Just then a woman came to the door of the house, and, looking down the
road, she saw her little girl walking with two men and a bear.

“Oh, my goodness, Rose! What are you doing?” cried the woman, who was
the mother of Rose. “Where have you been? And what is that terrible
bear doing?”

“He isn’t a terrible bear at all, Mamma,” answered Rose, laughing. “He
is a good trick bear, and he saved me from the bad dog.” And she told
about what had happened.

“Well, if it’s a tame, trick bear, why I suppose that is different,”
said the woman. “I’m much obliged to you,” she added to the men, “for
having your bear save my little girl from the peddler’s dog.”

“Dido did it all himself,” said George. “We were asleep when your Rose
came running along with the dog after her. Dido knocked him out of the
way.”

“He must be a good bear,” said Rose’s mother.

“He is!” cried the little girl. “You ought to see him do tricks, Mamma!
Will you let your bear do some tricks for my mother?” she asked.

“Surely,” answered George. “Come on now, Dido!”

So Dido did most of his tricks again, and when they were finished the
woman brought out some sugar cookies and other things, giving some to
the men and some to Dido.

“Oh, how good they are!” thought the dancing bear, chewing a cookie.
“They are as good as the buns with raisins in which the other lady gave
me.”

“Come, now, we must travel on,” called George to Dido, after a bit. “It
is very nice here, but we must go to a place where we can get money in
the hat when you do your tricks.”

So off started the two men with the dancing bear once more. For several
days they traveled, first stopping in one country village and then in
another, Dido doing his tricks very nicely.

Then for two days it rained, and as no one wanted to stand out in the
rain to see even a dancing bear there was nothing to do save to stay in
barns, or under sheds, until the weather cleared.

For George and Tom did not stop at hotels very often as they traveled
about with Dido. In the first place it cost too much money, and as the
weather was warm, and as George and Tom were sort of Gypsies they liked
to sleep out of doors nights, except when it rained. Then they would
find a haystack, or a barn, and get shelter.

Another reason they did not stop at hotels was because people who kept
them did not like bears in their places. Dido would have had to stay
out in the stable, and some horses are afraid of bears.

So it was not so nice for the men when it rained, though Dido did
not mind. His fur was so thick that it took a lot of rain to wet him
through, and he was fond of water anyhow.

But when it rained, and there was no one to watch Dido do his tricks,
of course no money came into the hat, and when there were no pennies
there was not so much to eat. So you see, after all, rain is not any
too good for a dancing bear.

But after a while the clouds rolled away, the sun came out and Dido and
his masters were glad. Once more they started off down the country
roads, Tom tooting on the horn and George putting Dido through his
tricks.

One day after Dido had done his dance in the streets of a small city
his two masters saw another man, like themselves. This man had a
hand-organ and a monkey, and he went about making music while the
monkey collected pennies in his red hat. Tom and George stopped for a
minute to talk to the hand-organ man, whom they had known years before.

“What is your name?” asked Dido of the monkey, when they found their
masters paying no attention to them.

“Jacko,” answered the monkey. “What’s yours?”

“Dido; and I can dance. Can you?”

“No, but I can gather pennies in my hat. Can you do that?”

Dido said he could not. He did not have a hat, anyhow. The bear and
monkey talked together, just as their masters were doing, but in a
different way of course. Then Jacko said:

“I have a cousin, a monkey named Mappo. Did you ever see him?”

“No,” replied Dido, “but I have met Don, the runaway dog, and Tum Tum,
the jolly elephant.”

“Why, Mappo, my cousin, knows them!” cried Jacko. “I have often
heard him speak of them. Mappo is such a merry monkey. He had many
adventures, and they have all been put in a book.”

“My! It seems every one is getting in books,” said Dido. “I hope to
have one written about me. But say! I’m hungry, aren’t you?”

“Yes, I am,” answered Jacko.

“My master always feeds me buns after I finish my tricks,” went on
the dancing bear, “but I guess he is so busy talking now that he has
forgotten it.”

“I wish we could get something to eat,” spoke Jacko. “Oh, look, Dido,
there’s a bakery store over there, and I see buns and cake in the
window, besides cookies.”

“So there are!” said Dido.

“Let’s go over and see if they will give us any,” went on the monkey
who was a cousin to Mappo. “My chain is loose, and I can easily run
over there.”

“My chain is loose, too,” said Dido. “Come on, we’ll go over to the
bakery and perhaps we can find some buns.”

Across the street went Dido and Jacko. Their masters were so busy
talking about their travels that they did not notice the two animals.
And, as it happened, the boy who had been left in charge of the bakery
had gone out to watch the dancing bear, and he was now standing
looking at the hand-organ, and wishing he had one like it. So he did
not see Dido and the monkey go in the bakery.

The dancing bear and the monkey went in the bakery. No one else was
there. In the window was a pile of cakes and buns.

“Oh, I am so hungry!” said Dido.

“So am I!” cried Jacko.

“I’ll tell you what let’s do,” said Dido. “Let’s take some buns, and
when our masters get through talking they will come in and pay for
them.”

“All right,” said Jacko, and he reached over in the bakery window and
took a paw full of buns. Dido did the same thing, and then the bear and
the monkey began to eat.




CHAPTER X

DIDO SCARES A MAN


“Aren’t these buns fine?” asked Dido, as he reached for another, which
had a big raisin on the top, something like the kind the farmer’s wife
made.

“They are very good,” said Jacko, the hand-organ monkey. “I don’t know
when I have had better buns. I’m glad we came in here.”

“So am I,” replied Dido. “Have you tried one of these sugar cookies?”

“No,” answered Jacko, “I haven’t. I’ve been so busy eating buns――”

“Oh, do try a cookie,” and the dancing bear, with his big paw, like a
hand, held something out to the monkey.

“Aren’t they good?” asked Dido, after Jacko had taken a taste of the
cookie.

“Indeed, yes. I’ll have another.”

So the bear and the monkey ate cookies and buns, and then Jacko found a
little cake, with sugar on the top.

“Oh, Dido!” he chattered. “These cakes are the best yet. Try one.”

So Dido did, and he liked it very much.

By this time the crowd of persons who had gathered about to watch the
dancing bear and the monkey saw the two animals over in the bakery. But
the three men――that is, the two who owned the dancing bear, and the one
who had the hand-organ――were still so busy talking that they did not
notice what was going on.

“Oh, look! The bear and monkey are eating everything in the bakery!”
cried a little girl. The boy who had been left in charge of the shop
heard this and back across the street he rushed. He did not wish for a
hand-organ any more.

The people stood in a crowd outside the bakery. The boy who should have
been in the shop, but who had run out, cried:

“Let me get in there! Let me in! I must drive out that bear and monkey,
or the baker will say it is my fault for letting them in!”

“You’d better not go in,” said a man. “The monkey would not hurt you,
but the bear might. Call the bear’s keepers.”

“Yes, that’s the best thing to do,” said a woman.

But before the boy could do this Jacko and Dido were eating more cakes
from the windows. Then they found some pies, and they liked those so
much they ate three, Dido taking two because he was largest, and needed
more.

“What are all the people watching us for?” asked Jacko, as he looked to
see what next he would take.

“Oh, I guess they think we are doing tricks,” said Dido. “But we are
only eating because we are hungry.”

“And when our masters get through talking they will pay for what we
have had,” said Jacko.

Just then the baker, who had been down in the cellar of his shop,
making bread and cake, came up into the store, thinking, of course,
that the boy he had left in charge, to wait on customers, would be
there. Instead of that the baker saw the bear and monkey eating things
from his show window.

“Oh, my! Oh, my! Oh, my!” cried the baker, three times, just like that,
he was so surprised. “Oh! Oh! Oh!”

Then he ran back down in the cellar and locked the door after him. But
he need not have been afraid, for neither Dido nor Jacko would have
harmed him in the least.

By this time George, Tom and the hand-organ man saw what was happening.
They looked across the street and saw the crowd in front of the bakery,
and also saw Dido and Jacko still eating cake.

“Oh, my!” cried George. “We shall have to pay a lot of money for what
our bear has eaten.”

[Illustration: Jacko and Dido were eating cakes from the window.]

“And I will have to pay for what my monkey took,” said the hand-organ
man.

“But they knew no better,” said George, kindly. “They were hungry, I
guess. But now they must have had enough.”

And Dido and Jacko did have enough. Never before had they had such
a fine feast. I forget just how much money the bear men and the
hand-organ man had to pay, but it was quite a sum, for the monkey and
bear had eaten many buns, pies, cookies and cakes. A bear is very big,
and when he is hungry he can eat much.

“You will have to do a lot of dancing and tricks to make up for all the
bakery things you took,” said George to Dido. But the bear did not mind
that, for he had had so many good things to eat.

For two or three days more Dido traveled on with his masters, going
from place to place, in towns and little villages where the bear did
his tricks.

And the people, especially the boys and girls, liked them so much that
they tossed many cents and dimes into the hat of George, so that he had
enough to buy things for himself, for Tom and for Dido, and the bear
did not have to go in any more bake shops all by himself.

Sometimes when Dido was doing his tricks, dogs would gather outside
the crowd of people watching, and would bark. For the dogs were a bit
afraid of the bear, and did not like him. That is why they barked.

Once a dog who did not know that Dido was tame, and was kind and good,
tried to bite the dancing bear.

Dido was now so large and strong that he might easily have hurt the dog
badly by one blow of his big paw. But instead of doing that Dido just
gently pushed the dog out of the way, and over into a watering trough,
where horses drank.

When the people saw this they laughed, and then that dog did not feel
much like biting Dido. The dog was ashamed of himself, and away he ran,
with his tail tucked between his legs.

“Good bear!” said George. “That’s the way to treat barking dogs.”

Another time in a small town, where Dido was doing his tricks in the
park, a team of horses were driven past. They smelled the wild smell of
the bear, which was more plain to them than to the people, and started
to run away.

A lady and little girl were in the carriage and they might have been
hurt had the horses gone far. But Tom, who was getting ready to blow a
marching tune on the brass horn, for Dido to do his trick, dropped the
horn and sprang for the horses.

He caught them by the bridles and held them so they could not run, and
the lady and little girl were not hurt.

“You are a good man to stop the runaway horses,” said a man in the
crowd.

“Well, it was the fault of our bear that the team started to run,” said
Tom, “so I knew it was my place to stop them.”

And when the horses saw that Dido was not going to chase after them, or
do them any harm, they were not frightened any more, but stood still,
so the lady and little girl in the carriage could watch the tricks
which Dido did.

That night Dido and his masters slept under a warm stack of hay in a
field, and a farmer gave them some good things to eat, because he liked
animals. Dido did some tricks that evening in front of the farmhouse,
before a crowd of boys and girls.

Early the next morning Dido awoke in his warm nest in the hay. He was
not tied to any tree now, for there was none in the field, and he could
wander about as he pleased. But by this time Dido was so tame that his
masters knew he would not run away.

“I think I will take a walk before breakfast,” said Dido to himself,
“and see if I cannot find a brook with fish in. I should like a fish
very much.”

Then Dido saw a telegraph pole beside the road near the field.

“I think I will climb that pole, and see how sharp my claws are,” said
Dido to himself. “I must keep in practice and I have not climbed any
poles in two or three days.”

So, having eaten all the red berries he wanted, Dido started to climb
up the telegraph pole. He had not gone very far up it before he heard
some one shouting at him. Looking up Dido saw a man on top of the pole.

“Hello!” said Dido to himself; “I did not know men could climb poles
like a bear. I wonder who you are and how you did it?”

The man worked for a telephone company, and on his boots he had sharp,
iron spurs, like a bear’s claws, and by sticking these spurs in the
wood of the pole the man could climb up.

But the man, who was out early fixing broken wires on the pole, looking
down and seeing a bear coming up after him, was much frightened.

“I say!” he cried. “Go on back! Don’t come up here after me! Go on
down! Get away!”

The man shouted loudly, but Dido did not understand why he, himself,
should stop climbing a pole on that account, so on he kept going up
higher and higher.

“Go back! Go back!” yelled the man. But Dido would not.




CHAPTER XI

DIDO IN THE CIRCUS


“What in the world is the matter with that man?” thought Dido, as the
dancing bear kept on climbing up the pole. “He acts so funny, just as
if he did not want me to come near him. My master does not act so. For,
though I know I used to be cross and growl at my master, and though I
was afraid of all men, I am not that way any more. I like men. He looks
like a nice man, up on the pole, and I want to see him. I never before
saw a man who could climb a telegraph pole as well as I can.”

So Dido kept on climbing up, and the man continued to yell and shout.
He went as far up the pole as he could get, and sat down on a stick
of wood that stuck out crossways. There were wires made fast to glass
knobs on the ends of these pieces of wood.

“He certainly is a queer man,” thought Dido. “He acts just as if he
didn’t like me. Well, I’ll soon show him that I won’t hurt him. I
wonder if he has a bun in his pocket?”

Then, all of a sudden, Dido saw the man throw something down.

“Ah! Perhaps that is a bun,” thought Dido.

But Dido felt the thing the man had thrown down hit him hard on his
nose, and it hurt so that the dancing bear gave a growl and a howl. It
was a hard screwdriver that had hit Dido on the nose. The telephone
lineman had thrown his screwdriver at the bear.

“Ouch!” said Dido to himself. “That was not nice! I wonder if he did
that on purpose?”

Dido stopped climbing for a moment, and looked up at the man. Then the
dancing bear rubbed his nose with his paw. A bear’s nose is very soft
and tender, and when he is hit there it hurts him very much.

Then, as Dido was rubbing his sore nose, all of a sudden, Bang!
something else was thrown by the man. It was a pair of pliers, for
cutting wire, and they hit Dido on the paw he was holding up.

“Ha!” thought the dancing bear. “It is a good thing I had my paw over
my nose, or I would be hurt worse than ever. I wonder why that man is
throwing things at me, and shouting so?”

Just then Tom and George, the keepers of the bear, came running out
of the field where they had been asleep under the haystack. They had
awakened, missed Dido, and had come to search for him.

“Why, look at our bear!” cried George. “He is up the pole.”

“So he is!” exclaimed Tom, in surprise.

Then the telephone lineman on the pole saw the other two men.

“Hi, there!” he called to them. “Is this your bear?”

“Surely that is our bear,” answered George.

“Well, then, I wish you’d call him down!” went on the lineman. “He
chased up here after me to bite and scratch me. Call him down.”

“Ha! No!” laughed George. “Dido would never climb up to bite or scratch
you. He is too good a bear for that. He is just climbing the pole, as
that is one of his tricks.”

“What! Is this a trick bear? Is he tame?” asked the man high up on the
pole.

“Of course he is tame,” said George.

“And he won’t hurt me?”

“Not a bit. He just wants to be friends with you.”

“Oh, then I am very sorry,” said the lineman quickly.

“Sorry for what?” asked Tom, curiously.

“That I threw my screwdriver and my pliers at your bear,” answered the
man on the telegraph pole. “I hit him on the nose. I thought he was a
wild bear after me, or I never would have done it. I did not see any
men with him.”

“Well, I guess Dido will forgive you for hitting him,” spoke George.
“Come on down, Dido, if the man is afraid of you.”

“Oh, I am not afraid any more,” the telephone man said, laughing.

Dido came down, and had his breakfast with George and Tom. Afterward
the telephone man climbed down, and gave Dido a piece of pie from his
dinner pail.

“That is to pay you because I hit you on the nose,” said the man. “I am
very sorry, and so I give you this little treat.”

And I think Dido understood, and forgave the man. For the dancing bear
ate the pie, and then, when George told him to, Dido let the lineman
pat him on the head.

“Now we will travel on again,” said George after a bit, and away he and
Tom went with Dido, blowing nice tooting tunes on the brass horn, and
giving a dancing-bear show wherever they could find a crowd of persons
with money to toss into the hat.

All through the long summer days Dido traveled about with his masters,
and then one day there came a change. One night, after he had danced
many times that day, Dido and his masters stopped at a hotel. Dido was
allowed to sleep out in the stable where there were no horses to be
frightened, while Tom and George went in the hotel to eat.

The next morning Dido saw a strange man with his masters when they came
out to the stable to feed him.

“There is our dancing bear,” said George to the new man. “Do you think
you would like to buy him?”

“If he can do all the tricks you say he can I may,” answered the other
man.

“I will show you what tricks he can do,” spoke George. “Come, Dido,
here is a sweet cracker for you. Now do your tricks.”

So out in front of the stable Dido danced, marched like a soldier and
turned somersaults.

“Those are good tricks,” said the strange man. “I will buy your bear
and take him to a circus. There I will have him do tricks in the ring.
Do you think he will?”

“Oh, yes,” answered George. “He was in a circus once before, but for
only a little while. Perhaps he may remember about it.”

The three men went back to the hotel, leaving some buns for Dido to
eat. And the dancing bear wondered what was going to happen to him.

Pretty soon George came out to where Dido was chained in the stable.
George gave Dido a piece of berry pie, and said:

“Good-by, Dido. Tom and I are going to sell you to this circus man. But
he will be good and kind to you, and teach you new tricks. So go with
him and be a good bear. Tom and I are going back to the mountains of
our own country, and perhaps we will catch more bears. Good-by, Dido.”

Tom came out, and blew a sad little tune on the brass horn. Then he too
said good-by to Dido, and the two men who had traveled around with Dido
so many months went away. Dido ran after them as far as his chain would
let him, and then he lay down and put his head between his paws.

Animals don’t cry, of course, but they can feel sad when their kind
masters or mistresses go away, and I am sure Dido felt sad. Dogs
sometimes feel so badly at being parted from their masters that they
will not eat.

But Dido was not that way. A little later, when the circus man came out
to the stable with a nice piece of fish for the dancing bear, Dido ate
it and was very glad to get it.

“Now, Dido,” said the man, “you are my bear, and I will be good to you.
We are not going about the country any more, to let you go dancing in
the streets and fields. You are going to perform in a circus ring,
under a tent, something like you did before, and I think you will like
it.”

Then came a not very happy time for Dido. He was put in a big box,
something like the trap in which he had been caught. But this box was
larger, as Dido was a big bear now, and the box had water in it, and
nice things to eat.

Then the box, with Dido in, was put on a wagon and taken to the
railroad station, where it was lifted on a train. Dido slept as much
as he could, for he did not like to travel that way. He would much
rather have tramped through the woods and over the fields. But soon his
journey was at an end.

Still in his box he was taken from the train, and when the box was
opened Dido found himself in what he thought at first was a big white
house. In it were many other animals, in cages, as Dido could see, and
he could smell other animals whom he could not see.

Dido walked out and rolled over in a pile of straw. It felt so good to
be out of that cage, that he wanted to laugh――and that is the way all
animals laugh. Then the dancing bear heard a voice saying close to his
ear:

“Well, I do believe it’s my old friend Dido, whom I met in Madison
Square Garden, New York City! Aren’t you Dido, the dancing bear?”

“That’s who I am,” answered Dido, standing up, “and you are――”

“Tum Tum, the jolly elephant,” was the answer. “I’m glad to see you
again.”

Dido looked around, and there, surely enough, was Tum Tum, holding out
his long nose, or trunk. Dido rubbed noses with him.

“How did you get here?” asked Tum Tum.

“Oh, my masters sold me to another man, and he said he was going to put
me in a circus. I guess this is it.”

“Yes, this is the circus,” answered Tum Tum. “Only it is traveling
around now, instead of staying for weeks at a time in New York. We go
to a new city every day, and we have a big tent instead of Madison
Square Garden to act in. This white house you see over us is a tent.”

“Oh, a tent, eh?” said Dido. “Well, it is quite nice.”

“Yes, it is nice except in cold weather,” said the elephant, who not
having fur, could not stand cold as bears can. “In the winter there is
no circus in a tent,” said Tum Tum.

“What do you do in winter?” asked Dido.

“Oh, when it is time for the snow and ice the circus goes, I have been
told, up to a place where we stay in big, warm barns until summer comes
again.”

Tum Tum told Dido many things about the circus, for which I have not
space in this book. And Dido also learned many new things. He learned
to sleep in a cage on wheels, in which he was drawn about the country,
or put on big, flat railroad cars to be pulled from place to place.
This was when the circus traveled, which was, nearly always, at night.

And Dido’s new master taught him many new tricks which the dancing bear
did in the circus ring, besides doing the ones George had taught him.
Dido learned to ride on a bicycle, he learned to walk across a long
pole, that was resting on two barrels. He learned to roll over and over
inside a barrel, and he learned to let a dog sit on his back and be
given a ride.

Dido liked it very much in the circus, and he made many friends, not
only among the animals but among the circus folk, for Dido was a gentle
bear.

But best of all Dido liked Tum Tum, the jolly elephant.

“I met a friend of yours while I was out traveling,” said Dido to the
circus elephant one day.

“Who was it?” asked Tum Tum.

“Don, the runaway dog.”

“Oh, do tell me about him,” begged Tum Tum, as he ate a bag of peanuts
a little girl held out to him. So Dido told about meeting Don.




CHAPTER XII

DIDO IN A FIRE


“What else did you do besides meeting Don?” asked Tum Tum, when the
dancing bear had finished telling about the runaway dog.

“Oh, many things happened to me,” said Dido. “I had many adventures, as
many, I think, as would fill a book.”

“Who knows?” asked Tum Tum. “Perhaps they will be put in a book. I
never thought my adventures would be printed, but they were. Just you
wait.”

So Dido waited, and while he waited the circus went on from place
to place. People came into the big tent to look at the animals, and
watch those who, like Dido, did tricks. Very often Dido’s new master
would think up a different trick for Dido to do, and the bear was very
anxious to please.

There was one trick Dido learned to do which he did not like at all, at
first. This was jumping through a big wooden ring which had little jets
of fire all around it. At least Dido thought it was fire, for the jets
glowed brightly, though they were not hot.

At first when his master brought out this glowing, blazing hoop, or
ring, Dido shrank away from it. But his master stood on the other side
of it, holding out an apple and a bun. Dido wanted both, very much,
but when he walked around the outside of the hoop, instead of leaping
through it to get the treat, his master put them away.

“No, no, Dido,” he said. “To get the apple and bun you must jump
through the hoop. Come on. It won’t hurt you. You know I would never do
anything to hurt you.”

So, after a bit, Dido did jump through the blazing hoop to get the
apple, and he found he was not hurt in the least, nor burned. And,
later on, he learned that around the hoop were only tiny electric
lights, like those which are sometimes put on Christmas trees in place
of candles, and these lights you can hold in your hand without feeling
any heat.

So Dido learned a new trick, and when he did it the people in the
circus tent clapped their hands loudly. By this time Dido had learned
that this meant they were pleased with him.

The people also clapped when Tum Tum did his tricks, and one day Tum
Tum and Dido performed a trick together. They had to practice it a
long while, though, before it was well done. And this was the trick:

On the broad, strong back of the jolly elephant was built a platform of
boards. It was square, and made so it could be lifted on and off, being
fastened on by broad straps, as are the little houses on the elephants’
backs in circus parades.

By means of a little ladder Dido and his new master could climb up to
this platform on Tum Tum’s back, and there, as the big elephant marched
around the ring, Dido did his dance, while the man played on the same
horn that Tom had used.

Around and around on the platform up on the back of Tum Tum, the jolly
elephant, rode Dido and his master. Dido did such a funny dance that he
made the children laugh.

“You are a very good bear,” said his master, patting him and giving him
two buns, one extra.

Dido did many other tricks in the circus as it went from place to
place. But now the weather was getting cooler.

“We shall soon go to our Winter quarters,” said Tum Tum. “And then for
some time we will stay in the same place, night after night.”

“Oh, I don’t mind traveling,” spoke Dido. “I rather like it.”

One day, as Dido was asleep in his cage after having done his tricks,
he heard a noise near the edge of the tent. It was a mewing, crying
sort of noise, and, the first thing Dido knew, something small and
black scrambled into his cage and hid down among the straw.

“Hello there!” called Dido, in animal language. “Who are you?”

“Oh, I’m Blackie,” was the answer. “Please don’t drive me out.”

“Of course I won’t drive you out,” said Dido kindly. “But who are you,
and why is your name Blackie?”

“I am a cat, and I am called Blackie because I am black,” was the
answer, and then a cat stuck her head out from under the straw in
Dido’s cage, where he always went to rest after having done his tricks.

“What is the matter with you?” asked Dido. “You seem frightened.”

“I am frightened,” said Blackie. “A lot of bad boys were chasing me and
throwing stones at me. I ran as fast as I could, but they nearly caught
me. But I saw this big white house and I ran in it. Then I saw a place
to hide under the straw in your cage-wagon, and I jumped up here.”

“And you are very welcome,” said Dido kindly. “I am glad you got away
from the boys. But this is not a white house, though I thought it was
myself, at first.”

“What is it?” asked Blackie.

“It is a circus tent. If you like you may stay and see me do my tricks.”

“Thank you, I would like to stay,” spoke Blackie, “but you see I am
trying to find my way home. I am lost.”

“Lost!” exclaimed Dido. “That’s what happened to Don, the runaway dog.
He knows Tum Tum, our jolly elephant.”

“Was Don lost?” asked Blackie.

“Yes, but he found his home again.”

“I hope I do,” said Blackie. “I used to live with a very nice little
boy and girl, who treated me kindly, and gave me warm milk for
breakfast. One day I strayed too far off, went in a vacant house and
was locked in. I found my way to the roof and, later, met a good lady
who cared for me. She took me out to the country in a basket, but when
the cover came loose I jumped out, thinking I could find my way back
home alone. But I can’t seem to, and I’ve walked ever and ever so far.
Then these boys chased me and I ran in here.”

“Well, I wish I could help you, but I can’t leave the circus,” said
Dido. “Here is a bit of fish I didn’t need; you may have that, and
perhaps you will feel better after eating.”

Blackie did. She thanked Dido very much and went to sleep in the straw
of the bear’s cage. One of the animal men saw her and gave her some
milk to drink.

“Can’t you really stay and see me do some tricks?” asked Dido.

“No, thank you,” spoke Blackie. “I’ll just peep out of this tent, as
you call it, and if the boys are gone I’ll trot along. Maybe I shall
find my home to-day.”

Blackie looked out under the tent. She saw no boys.

“Good-by!” called the lost cat to Dido. “I’m going away.”

“I hope you find your home, and that I see you again,” said Dido.
“Good-by!”

In a few more weeks the weather grew quite cool, and one day the big
circus tent was taken down for the last time, the cages were put on the
cars, and the circus started on a long journey.

“Where are we going?” asked Dido of Tum Tum.

“To the big barns I told you about,” answered the jolly elephant. “We
are going into winter quarters.”

And, a few days later, there is where Dido found himself. He was still
kept in his cage, which was in a big barn with many other cages of
animals. There were horses and elephants in the barn, Tum Tum being
there, of course.

Dido did not have to do his tricks every day now. But once a week or
so his master came to put him through them, to see that the bear had
not forgotten how to dance, or turn somersaults.

It was nice and warm in the big circus barn, and the animals had enough
to eat, so they had a very good time of it.

“Still I liked traveling about the country with George and Tom,” said
Dido. “It was real jolly sleeping out of doors, except when it rained.
And I like going about with the circus, too.”

“Oh, you will be able to go about again,” said Tum Tum. “When warm
weather comes we shall travel once more.”

But something happened which nearly stopped all the circus animals from
ever traveling about the country again.

One night Dido was awakened in his cage by a queer smell. And there was
a funny feeling in his nose and throat as if he wanted to sneeze.

Dido stood up in his cage and looked across the barn. He saw smoke,
and he knew what smoke was, for he had often seen Tom and George make
a fire in the woods to boil coffee. And Dido saw fire with the smoke.
Then he knew what the queer smell was that had made him want to sneeze.
It was the smoke in his nose.

The fire grew brighter and the smoke thicker. Dido stood close to the
bars of his cage and called to Tum Tum, who was asleep standing up, as
elephants often do.

“Tum Tum!” called Dido in animal talk, “the circus barn is on fire! The
barn is on fire! What shall we do?”

Tum Tum awoke with a start. He looked at the fire, which was in one end
of the barn, farthest off from the animal cages.

“Oh, my! A fire!” cried Tum Tum. “That is terrible! We must get out
somehow!”

“That is easy for you to do,” cried Dido, “for you are not in a cage.
But what shall I do?”

“We must call to the circus men to come and let you caged animals out,”
said Tum Tum. “I’ll call,” and he made a loud trumpet noise.

“They had better hurry,” said Dido. “The fire is growing hotter. Once
my masters made a fire in the woods, and it spread in the dry leaves so
they had to get water and put it out. Oh, Tum Tum, can’t you let me out
of my cage?”

“Yes,” said Tum Tum, “I will. I can open many animal cages with my
trunk.” Tum Tum was a trick elephant and could do many things. He soon
had opened the cage of the dancing bear, and Dido could jump out. By
this time the other animals were much excited by the fire. Some of them
broke out of their cages by themselves. Others Tum Tum let out, helped
by Dido.

[Illustration: He soon had opened the cage of the dancing bear and Dido
jumped out.]

“But we must get out of the burning circus barn,” Dido said. “To be out
of our cages will do us no good unless we get out of the barn, too.”

Tum Tum, and the other elephants and other animals, ran around the
inside of the circus barn, looking for an open door. But there was
none. All the doors and windows were tightly fastened to keep out the
cold.

By this time men could be heard outside shouting about the fire. Dido
ran up to one door. This led outside, as he knew, for he had come in
and out of it several times.

“Tum Tum!” called the dancing bear, “if we could break open this door
we could get out and let the other animals out too. Let us try to break
down the door.”

“All right!” cried Tum Tum. “I will bang it with my strong head. Look
out! Here I come!”

Tum Tum backed up a little way. Then he ran at the door and struck it
with his head. At first it would not open. But when Tum Tum struck it
again and again, and when Dido hit on it with his powerful paws, the
door began to splinter and crack.

“Good!” cried the other animals. “Dido and Tum Tum will now let us out
of the burning barn!”

Dido and Tum Tum banged on the door. With his paws Dido pulled away
the splinters and pieces of wood that Tum Tum broke off with his head.
Soon there was room for all the animals to go out.

“Come on!” cried Tum Tum. And he and Dido let all the other animals run
out first and then they went out. And it was high time, too, for the
barn was blazing very hot and fast now.

Then men came up with hoses to squirt water on the fire, while other
men drove the animals to another barn where they could stay for a while.

“All the animals saved!” cried the head circus man when the fire was
out. “That’s fine! I wonder how they got out of the barn.”

“Oh, Dido and Tum Tum let them out,” said one of the trainers. “I saw
the elephant and bear break down the door.”

Then the circus folk, as well as the animals, loved Dido and Tum Tum
more than ever. Soon the burned barn was built over new, and it was
better than before. Dido stayed in it all winter and when spring came
again he and Tum Tum started out with the circus show again.

I wish I had space to tell you other adventures of Dido, the dancing
bear, but this book is quite filled, as you may see. And Dido did
finally get into a book, didn’t he? I hope he likes what I have
written about him, if he ever sees it.

But if I can not tell you any more about Dido I can about Blackie,
the cat who hid in the bear’s cage. So the next book will be named
“Blackie, a Lost Cat: Her Many Adventures.” And I hope you will like
what I have to write about her.

“Tum Tum,” said Dido one day as he was dancing on the platform on the
elephant’s back, “do you remember the fire?”

“I should say I _did_,” answered Tum Tum. “I never want to see another.”

“Nor do I,” spoke Dido, as he whirled about while his circus master
tooted a gay tune on the brass horn.

Then Dido turned somersaults in the circus ring, jumped through the
lighted hoop and did many other tricks.

And now let us all say:

“Good-by, Dido!”


THE END




GOOD STORIES FOR CHILDREN

(From four to nine years old)

THE KNEETIME ANIMAL STORIES

By RICHARD BARNUM


[Illustration]

In all nursery literature animals have played a conspicuous part; and
the reason is obvious, for nothing entertains a child more than the
antics of an animal. These stories abound in amusing incidents such as
children adore, and the characters are so full of life, so appealing to
a child’s imagination, that none will be satisfied until they have met
all of their favorites――Squinty, Slicko, Mappo, and the rest.

  1 Squinty, the Comical Pig.
  2 Slicko, the Jumping Squirrel.
  3 Mappo, the Merry Monkey.
  4 Tum Tum, the Jolly Elephant.
  5 Don, a Runaway Dog.
  6 Dido, the Dancing Bear.
  7 Blackie, a Lost Cat.
  8 Flop Ear, the Funny Rabbit.
  9 Tinkle, the Trick Pony.
  10 Lightfoot, the Leaping Goat.
  11 Chunky, the Happy Hippo.
  12 Sharp Eyes, the Silver Fox.
  13 Nero, the Circus Lion.
  14 Tamba, the Tame Tiger.
  15 Toto, the Rustling Beaver.
  16 Shaggo, the Mighty Buffalo.
  17 Winkie, the Wily Woodchuck.

_Cloth, Large 12mo., Illustrated._


 BARSE &amp; HOPKINS
 Publishers
 Newark, N. J.      New York, N. Y.


       *       *       *       *       *


 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.






End of Project Gutenberg's Dido, the Dancing Bear, by Richard Barnum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIDO, THE DANCING BEAR ***

***** This file should be named 61450-0.txt or 61450-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/4/5/61450/

Produced by Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

