The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Monster, by Gardner F. Fox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Last Monster

Author: Gardner F. Fox

Release Date: November 5, 2020 [EBook #63645]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST MONSTER ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           The Last Monster

                           By GARDNER F. FOX

          Irgi was the last of his monster race, guardian of
          a dead planet, master of the secret of immortality.
             It was he whom the four men from Earth had to
               conquer to gain that secret--a tentacled
           monstrosity whom Earthly weapons could not touch.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Planet Stories Fall 1945.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Irgi was the last of his race. There was no one else, now; there had
been no others for hundreds and hundreds of years. Irgi had lost count
of time dwelling alone amid the marble halls of the eon-ancient city,
but he knew that much. There were no others.

Only Irgi, alone.

He moved now along the ebony flooring, past the white marble walls hung
with golden drapes that never withered or shed their aurate luster in
the opalescent mists that bathed the city in shimmering whiteness. They
hung low, those wispy tendrils of mist, clasping everything in their
clinging shelter, destroying dust and germs. Irgi had discovered the
mist many years ago, when it was too late to save his kind.

He had flung a vast globe of transparent metal above this greatest of
the cities of the Urg and filled it with the mist, and in it he had
stored the treasures of his people. From Bar Nomala, from Faryl, and
from the far-off jungle city of Kreed had he brought the riches of the
Urg and set them up. Irgi enjoyed beauty, and he enjoyed work. It was
the combination of both that kept him sane.

Toward a mighty bronze doorway he went, and as his body passed an
invisible beam, the bronze portals slid apart, noiselessly, opening to
reveal a vast circular chamber that hummed and throbbed, and was filled
with a pale blue luminescence that glimmered upon metal rods and bars
and ten tall cones of steelite.

In the doorway, Irgi paused and ran his eyes about the chamber, sighing.

This was his life work, this blue hum and throb. Those ten cones
lifting their disced tips toward a circular roof bathed in, and drew
their power from, a huge block of radiant white matter that hung
suspended between the cones, in midair. All power did the cones and the
block possess. There was nothing they could not do, if Irgi so willed.
It was another discovery that came too late to save the Urg.

Irgi moved across the room. He pressed glittering jewels inset in a
control panel on the wall, one after another, in proper sequence.

The blue opalescence deepened, grew dark and vivid. The hum broadened
into a hoarse roar. And standing out, startlingly white against the
blue, was the queer block of shining metal, shimmering and pulsing.

Irgi drew himself upwards, slowly turning, laving in the quivering
bands of cobalt that sped outward from the cones. He preened his body
in their patterns of color, watching it splash and spread over his
chest and torso. Where it touched, a faint tingle lingered; then spread
outwards, all over his huge form.

Irgi was immortal, and the blue light made him so.

"There, it is done," he whispered to himself. "Now for another oval I
can roam all Urg as I will, for the life spark in me has been cleansed
and nourished."

He touched the jeweled controls, shutting the power to a low murmur. He
turned to the bronze doors, passed through and into the misty halls.

"I must speak," Irgi said as he moved along the corridor. "I have not
spoken for many weeks. I must exercise my voice, or lose it. That is
the law of nature. It would atrophy, otherwise.

"Yes, I will use my voice tonight, and I will go out under the dome and
look up at the stars and the other planets that swing near Urg, and I
will talk to them and tell them how lonely Irgi is."

He turned and went along a hall that opened into a broad balcony which
stood forth directly beneath a segment of the mighty dome. He stared
upwards, craning all his eyes to see through the darkness pressing down
upon him.

"Stars," he whispered, "listen to me once again. I am lonely, stars,
and the name and fame of Irgi means nothing to the walls of my city,
nor to the Chamber of the Cones, nor even--at times--to Irgi himself."

He paused and his eyes widened, staring upwards.

"By the Block," he said to the silence about him. "There is something
up there that is not a star, nor a planet, nor yet a meteor."

It was a spaceship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson took his hands from the controls of the gigantic ship that
hurtled through space, and wiped his sweaty palms on his thighs. His
grey eyes bored like a steel awl downward at the mighty globe swinging
in the void.

"The last planet in our course," he breathed. "Maybe it has the radium!"

"Yes," whispered the man beside him, wetting his lips with his tongue.
"No use to think of failure. If it hasn't, we'll die ourselves, down
there."

Radium. And the Plague. It had come on Earth suddenly, had the Plague,
back in the first days of space travel, after Quigg, the American
research scientist at Cal Tech, discovered a way to lift a rocket ship
off the Earth, and propel it to the Moon.

They had been slow, lumbering vessels, those first spaceships; not at
all like the sleek craft that plied the voids today. But it had been a
beginning. And no one had thought anything of it when Quigg, who had
made the first flight through space, died of cancer.

As the years passed to a decade, and the ships of Earth rode to Mars
and Venus, it began to be apparent that a lifetime of space travel
meant a hideous death. Scientists attributed it to the cosmic rays, for
out in space there was no blanketing layer of atmosphere to protect
the fleshy tissues of man from their piercing power. It had long been
a theory that cosmic rays were related to the birth of new life in the
cosmos; perhaps they were, said some, the direct cause of life. Thus by
causing the unorderly growth of new cells that man called cancer, the
cosmic rays were destroying the life they had created.

It meant death to travel in space, and only the stupendous fees paid to
the young men who believed in a short life and a merry one, kept the
ships plying between Mars and Earth and Venus. Lead kept out the cosmic
rays, but lead would not stand the terrific speed required to lift a
craft free of planetary gravity; and an inner coating of lead brought
men into port raving with lead poisoning illusions.

Cancer cases increased on Earth. It was learned that the virulent
form of space cancer, as it was called, was in some peculiar manner,
contagious to a certain extent. The alarm spread. Men who voyaged in
space were segregated, but the damage had been done.

The Plague spread, and ravaged the peoples of three planets.

Hospitals were set up, and precious radium used for the fight. But the
radium was hard to come by. There was just not enough for the job.

A ship was built, the fastest vessel ever made by man. It was designed
for speed. It made the swiftest interplanetary craft seem a lumbering
barge by comparison. And mankind gave it to Valentine Emerson to take
it out among the stars to find the precious radium in sufficient
quantities to halt the Plague.

It had not been easy to find a crew. The three worlds knew the men
were going to their doom. It would be a miracle if ever they reached
a single planet, if they did not perish of space cancer before their
first goal. Carson Nichols, whose wife and children were dying of the
Plague, begged him for a chance. A murderer convicted to the Martian
salt mines, Karl Mussdorf, grudgingly agreed to go along on the promise
that he won a pardon if he ever came back. With Mussdorf went a little,
wry-faced man named Tilford Gunn, who knew radio, cookery, and the fine
art of pocket-picking. The two seemed inseparable.

Now Emerson was breathing softly, "Yes, it had better be there, or else
we die."

He ran quivering fingers over his forearm, felt the strange lumps that
heralded cancer. Involuntarily, he shuddered.

Steps clanged on the metal runway beneath them. Mussdorf pushed up
through the trap and got to his feet. He was as big as Emerson, bulky
where Emerson was lithe, granite where Emerson was chiseled steel. His
hair was black, and his brows shaggy. A stubborn jaw shot out under
thin, hard lips.

"There it is, Karl," said Nichols. "Start hoping."

Mussdorf scowled darkly, and spat.

"A hell of a way to spend my last days," he growled. "I'm dying on my
feet, and I've got to be a martyr to a billion people who don't know
I'm alive."

"You know a better way to die, of course," replied Emerson.

"You bet I do. There's a sweet little redhead in New Mars. She'd make
dying a pleasure. In fact," he chuckled softly, "that's just the way
I'd let her kill me."

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson snorted, glancing down at the controls. Beneath his steady
fingers, the ship sideslipped into the gravity tug of the looming orb,
shuddered a moment, then eased downward.

"Tell Gunn to come up," ordered Emerson. "No need for him to be below."

Mussdorf dropped to the floor, lowered his shaggy head through the open
trap, and bellowed. A hail from the depths of the ship answered him. A
moment later, Gunn stood with the others: a little man with a wry smile
twisting his features to a hard mask.

"Think she's got the stuff, skipper?" he asked Emerson.

"The spectroscope'll tell us. Break it out."

"You bet."

The ship rocked gently as Emerson set it down on a flat, rocky plain
between two high, craggy mountains that rose abruptly from the tiny
valley. It was just lighting as the faint rays of the suns that served
this planet nosed their way above the peaks. Like a silver needle on a
floor of black rock, the spacecraft bounced once, twice; then lay still.

Within her gleaming walls, four men bent with hard faces over gleaming
bands of color on a spectroscopic screen. With quivering fingers,
Emerson twisted dials and switches.

"Hell!" exploded Mussdorf. "I might have known it. Not a trace."

Emerson touched his forearm gently, and shuddered.

Nichols bit his lips, and thought of Marge and the kids; Gunn licked
his lips with a dry tongue and kept looking at Emerson.

With one sweep of his brawny arm, Mussdorf sent the apparatus flying
against the far wall to shatter in shards.

No one said a word.

Something whispered in the ship. They jerked their heads up, stood
listening. The faint susurration swept all about them, questioning,
curious. It came again, imperative; suddenly demanding.

"Gawd," whispered Gunn. "Wot is it, guv'nor?"

Emerson shook his head, frowning, suddenly glad that the others had
heard it, too.

"Maybe somebody trying to speak to us," stated Nichols.

The whispers grew louder and harsher. Angry.

"Take it easy," yelled Mussdorf savagely. "We don't know what you're
talking about. How can we answer you, you stupid lug?"

Gunn giggled hysterically, "We can't even 'alf talk 'is bloomin'
language."

The rustle ceased. The silence hung eerily in the ship. The men looked
at one another, curious; somehow, a little nervous.

"What a radio _he_ must have," said Emerson softly. "The metal of our
hull is his loudspeaker. That's why we heard him in all directions."

Mussdorf nodded, shaggy brows knotted.

"We'll see what his next move is," he muttered. "If he gets too fresh,
we'll try a sun-blaster out on him."

The ship began to glow softly, flushing a soft, delicate green. The
light bathed the interior, turning the men a ghastly hue. Gunn shivered
and looked at Emerson, who went to the port window; stood staring out,
gasping.

"Wot's happenin' now?" choked Gunn.

"We're off the ground! Whatever it is, it's lifting us."

The others crowded about him, looking out. Here the green was more
vivid, intense. They could feel its surging power tingling on their
skins. Beneath them, the jagged peak of the mountain almost grazed the
hull. Spread out under their eyes was the panorama of a dead planet.

Great rocks lay split and tumbled over one another in a black
desolation. Sunlight glinting on their jagged edges, made harsh
shadows. Far to the north a mountain range shrugged its snow-topped
peaks to a sullen sky. To the south, beyond the rocks, lay a white
waste of desert. To the west--

"A city," yelled Nichols, "the place is inhabited. Thank God, thank
God--"

Mussdorf erupted laughter.

"For what? How do we know what they're like? An inhabited planet
doesn't mean men. We found that out--several times."

"We can hope," said Emerson sharply. "Maybe they have some radium,
stored so that our spectroscope couldn't pick it up."

The mighty globe that hung over the city glimmered in the morning suns.
Beneath it, the white towers and spires of the city reared in alien
loveliness above graceful buildings and rounded roofs. A faint mist
seemed to hang in the city streets.

"It's empty," said Nichols heavily. "Deserted."

"Something's alive," protested Emerson. "Something that spoke to us,
that is controlling this green beam."

       *       *       *       *       *

A section of the globe slid back, and the spaceship moved through the
opening. The globe slipped back and locked after it.

"They have us now," grunted Mussdorf. He slid his fingers along the
transparent window, pressing hard, the skin showing white as his
knuckles lifted. He said swiftly, "You guys can stay here if you want,
but I'm getting myself a sun-blaster. Two of them. I'm not going to be
caught short when the time for action comes."

He swung through the trap and out of sight. They heard him running
below; heard the slam of opened doors, the withdrawal of the guns. They
could imagine him belting them about his waist.

"Bring us some," cried Emerson suddenly, and turned again to look out
the window.

The spaceship settled down on the white flagging of an immense square.
The green beam was gone, suddenly. The uncanny silence of the place
pressed in on them.

"Think it's safe to go out?" asked Nichols.

"Try the atmospheric recorder," said Emerson. "If the air's okay, I'd
like to stretch my own legs."

Nichols twisted chrome wheels, staring at a red line that wavered on a
plastic screen, then straightened abruptly, rigid.

"Hey," yelled Nichols excitedly. "It's pure. I mean actually pure. No
germs. No dust. Just clean air!"

Emerson leaped to his side, staring, frowning.

"No germs. No dust. Why--that means there's no disease in this place!
No disease."

He began to laugh, then caught himself.

"No disease," he whispered, "and every one of us is going to die of
cancer."

Mussdorf came up through the trap and passed out the sun-blasters. They
buckled them around their waists while Mussdorf swung the bolts of the
door. He threw it open, and clean air, and faint tendrils of whitish
mist came swirling into the ship.

Nichols took a deep breath and his boyish face split with a grin.

"I feel like a kid again on a Spring day back on Earth. You know, with
a ball and a glove under your arm, with the sun beating down on you,
swinging a bat and whistling. You felt good. You were young. Young! I
feel like that now."

They grinned and went through the door, dropping to the street.

They turned.

It was coming across the square, flowing along on vast black tentacles
towering over twenty feet high, with a great torso seemingly sculpted
out of living black marble. A head that held ten staring eyes looked
down at them. Six arms thrust out of the torso, moving like tentacles,
fringed with cilia thick as fingers.

"Lord," whispered Mussdorf. "What is it?"

"Don't know," said Emerson. "Maybe it's friendly--"

"Friendly?" queried Mussdorf harshly. "_That_ doesn't know the meaning
of the word! I'm going to let it taste a blast--"

His hand dove for the sun-blaster in his holster; yanked it free and
upward, firing brilliant yellow jets as he jerked the trigger.

"Look _out_!" yelled Emerson.

The thing twisted sideways with an eerie grace, dodging the amber beams
of solar power that sizzled past its bulbous head. As it moved, its
tentacled arms and legs slithered out with unthinkable rapidity, fell
and wrapped around Mussdorf.

The big Earthman was lifted high into the air, squeezed until his lungs
nearly collapsed. He hung limp in a gigantic tentacle as Emerson ran
to one side, trying for a shot without hitting Mussdorf. But the thing
was diabolically clever. It held Mussdorf aloft, between itself and
Emerson, while its other arms stabbed out at Gunn and Nichols, catching
them up and shaking them as a terrier shakes a rat.

"Hold on," called Emerson, dodging and twisting, gun in hand, seeking a
spot to fire at.

The thing dropped the Earthmen suddenly; its legs gathered beneath it
and launched it full at Emerson. Caught off guard, the Earthman lifted
his sun-blaster--felt it ripped from his fingers, knew a hard blackness
thrashing down at him. He went backwards, sickened....

       *       *       *       *       *

Irgi stared at the things that lay on the white flagging. Queer beings
they were, unlike anything Irgi had ever conceived. Only two legs, only
two arms. And such weak little limbs! Why, an Urgian cat would make
short work of them if an Urgian cat existed any more, and Irgi had
never rated cats very highly.

He looked at the spaceship, ran exploring feelers over it. He cast a
glance back at the creatures again, and shook his head. Strange beings
they might be, but they had mastered interplanetary travel. Well, he'd
always maintained that life would be different on other worlds. Life
here on Urg took different patterns.

Irgi bent to wrap long arms about the queer beings, lifting them. His
eyes were caught suddenly by the lumps protruding from their arms and
legs, from face and chest. The growth disease! That was bad, but Irgi
knew a way to cure it. Irgi knew a way to cure anything.

He slid swiftly across the square and onto a flat, glittering ramp that
stretched upward toward an arched doorway set like a jewel of light
in a long, low building next to the vast, round Chamber of the Cones.
He carried these creatures easily, without trouble. The ease of his
passage gave him time to think.

He had been glad to find these creatures. They were someone to
converse with after centuries of loneliness. But as he approached them
there in the square, calling out gladly to them, they could not hear
him. His voice was pitched eight vibrations to the second. He wondered
idly if that was beyond the hearing range of these two-legged things.
He ought to check that, to be sure. Still, they had heard him on their
ship. He had caught a confused, angry murmur on the radiation recorder.
Perhaps the metal of the hull had in some manner made his voice audible
to them, speeded up the vibrations to twelve or fifteen a second.

Then there was the matter of the growth disease. He could eliminate
that easily enough, in the Chamber of the Cones. But first they would
have to be prepared. And the preparation--hurt. Well, better a few
moments of agony than a death through a worse.

And if he could not speak to them, they could speak to him, through
their minds. Once unconscious, he could tap their memories with an
electrigraph screen. That should be absorbing. It made Irgi happy,
reflecting upon it, and Irgi had not known happiness for a long time.

From the passage he hurried into a large white room, fitted with glass
vials and ovules and glittering metal instruments, so many in number
that the room seemed a jungle of metal. Down on flat, smooth tables
Irgi dropped his burdens. With quick tendrils he adjusted straps to
them, bound them securely. From a small, wheeled vehicle he took a
metal rod and touched it to their foreheads. As it met the flesh, it
hummed once faintly.

"It's short-circulated their nervous systems for a while, absorbed the
electric charges all intelligent beings cast," Irgi said aloud, glad at
this chance to exercise his voice. "They won't be able to feel for some
time. When the worst pain will have passed, they will recover. And now
to examine their minds--"

He fitted metal clamps over their heads and screwed them tight. He
wheeled forward a glassy screen; plugged in the cords that dangled from
its frame to the metal clamps.

"I wonder if they've perfected this," Irgi mused. "They must be aware
that the brain gives off electrical waves. Perhaps they can chart
those waves on graphs. But do they know that each curve and bend of
those waves represents a picture? I can translate those waves into
pictures--but can they?"

He slouched a little on his tentacles, squatting, gazing at the screen
as he flipped over a lever.

A picture quivered on the screen; grew nebulous, then cleared. Irgi
found himself staring at a city far vaster than Urg. Grim white
towers peaked high into the air, and broad, flat ramps circled them,
interwoven like ribbons in the sunlight. On the tallest and largest
buildings were great fields of metal painted a dull luster, where
queerly wrought flying ships landed and took off.

The scene changed suddenly. He looked into a hospital room and watched
a pretty young woman smiling up at him. She too, had the growth
disease. Now he beheld the mighty salt mines where naked men swung huge
picks at the crusted crystals, sweating and dying under a strange sun.
Even these remnants of humanity festered with the growth.

A tall, lean man in white looked out at him. His lips moved, and Irgi
read their meaning. This man spoke to one named Emerson, commissioning
him with a spaceship, reciting the need of radium, the dread of the
plague. The thoughts of this Emerson were coming in clearer, as Irgi in
sudden interest, flipped over different dials. The unspoken thoughts
pouring into his brain through the screen continued. The words he did
not understand, but the necessity for radium, and the danger of the
growth disease he did. The pictures jumbled, grew chameleonesque--

Irgi stared upward at a colossal figure graven in lucent white marble.
He made out the letters chiseled into the base: GEORGE WASHINGTON. He
wondered idly what this Washington had done, to merit such undying
fame. He must have created a nation, or saved it. He wished there were
Urgians alive to build a statue to _him_.

He rose suddenly, standing upright on his tentacles, swaying gently.
Why, he had the power to make himself immortal! These creatures would
gladly build statues to him! True, he could not create a nation--_but
he could save it_!

Irgi unfastened clamps, and rolled the screen aside. He reached to a
series of black knobs inset in the wall, and turned them carefully.
Turning, he saw the figures of the four men stiffen to rigidity as a
red aura drifted upward from the tabletop, passing through them as if
they were mist, rising upwards to dissipate in the air near the ceiling.

"That will prepare their bodies for the Chamber of the Cones," he said.
"When they realize that I am their friend, they will gladly hear my
counsels!"

Opening the laboratory door, Irgi passed out and closed it behind him.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the sweat of agony trickling down his forehead and over his eyes
and cheeks that woke Emerson. He opened his eyes, then clamped them
shut as his body writhed in pain.

"Oh, Lord!" he whimpered, bloodying his mouth where his teeth sank into
his lips.

In every fibre of his body sharp lancets cut and dug. In arms and legs
and chest and belly they twisted and tore. Into the tissues beneath his
skin, all along the muscles and the bone, the fiery torment played. He
could not stand it; he could not--

He flipped his head to right, to left; saw the others stretched out
and strapped even as he. They were unconscious. What right had they to
ignore this agony? Why didn't they share it with him? He opened his
lips to shriek; then bit down again, hard.

Nichols screamed suddenly, his body aching.

It woke the others. They too, bellowed and screamed and sobbed, and
their arms and legs writhed like wild things in a trap.

"Got to get free," Emerson panted, straining against the wristbands.
The hard muscles of his arms ridged with effort, but the straps held.
He dropped back, sobbing.

"That fiend," yelled Mussdorf. "That ten-eyed, octopus-legged,
black-hearted spawn of a mismated monster did this to us. Damn him!
Damn him! If I ever get loose I'll cut his heart out and make him eat
it."

"Maybe--maybe he's vivisecting us," moaned Nichols. "With rays or--or
something--aagh! I can't stand it!"

"Hang on, kid," gritted Emerson, fighting the straps. "I think it's
lessening. Yeah, yeah--it is. It doesn't hurt so much now."

Mussdorf grunted astonishment.

"You're right. It is lessening. And--hey, one of my arm buckles is
coming loose. It's torn a little. Maybe I can work it free."

They turned their heads to watch, biting their lips, the sweat standing
in colorless beads on their pale foreheads. Mussdorf's thick arm bulged
its muscles as he wrenched and tugged, panting. A buckle swung outward,
clanging against the tabletop as it ripped loose. Mussdorf held his arm
aloft and laughed harsh triumph.

"I'll have you all loose in a second," he grunted, ripping straps from
his body.

He leaped from the table and stretched. He grinned into their faces.

"You know, it's funny--but I feel great. Huh, I must've sweated all the
aches out of me. Here, Gunn--you first."

"Thanks, Karl. We're still pals, aren't we?"

When Gunn was free, Mussdorf came to stand over Emerson, looking down
at him. His eyes narrowed suddenly. He grinned a little, twisting his
lips.

"Maybe you fellows ought to stay tied up," he said. "In case that--that
thing comes back. He won't blame us all for the break we're making."

"Not on your life," said Emerson.

But Mussdorf shook his head, and his lips tightened.

"No. No, I think it's better the way I say."

"Don't be a fool, Mussdorf," snapped Emerson savagely. "It isn't your
place to think, anyhow. That's mine. I'm commander of this force. What
I say is an order."

Mussdorf grinned dryly. Into his eyes came a glint of hot, sullen anger.

"You were our commander--out there, in space. We're on a planet now.
Things are different. I want to learn the secret of those mists,
Emerson. Something tells me I'd get a fortune for it, on Earth."

Emerson squirmed helplessly, cursing him, saying, "What's gotten into
you?"

"Nothing new. Remember me, Karl Mussdorf? I'm a convict, I am. A salt
mine convict. I'd have done anything to get out of that boiling hell. I
volunteered to go with you for the radium. Me and Gunn. Nichols doesn't
count. He came on account of his wife and kids. We were the only two
who'd come. Convicts, both of us."

       *       *       *       *       *

Mussdorf drew air into his lungs until his ribs showed against the rips
in his jacket.

He went on slowly, "All along I've thought that if we ever did discover
radium in any quantity to cure the folks of space out of it. I want to
be that somebody, Emerson. With my pardon and that profit, I could be a
boss on Mars. And you know what it's like to be a boss on Mars."

Emerson writhed in his straps, wrenching and twisting until his muscles
crackled, seeking freedom. His lips snarled oaths at the big criminal.

"If I ever get out of this, I'll teach you who's boss--right here!"

Mussdorf laughed his confidence, "Don't worry. You won't. Those straps
are pretty secure. I'm lucky one of mine was ripped."

The big man turned to Gunn; looked down at him, curiously.

"You with me, Til?"

Gunn looked at Emerson; looked up at Mussdorf, nodding.

"I think we got a chance, guv'nor," he muttered softly. "Them mists
that don't 'ave germs. They're worth lots. People will pay plenty for
h'air without germs."

The big man and the little man swung toward the door. They paused at
the threshold and glanced back.

"We'll give you a chance to think it over, Emerson," Mussdorf grated.
"You can use a few billions, same as us. We aren't hogs. We're willing
to share--"

"Get out!" Emerson spat.

Mussdorf shrugged and followed Gunn into the corridor, carefully
closing the door behind him. He glanced both ways frowning.

"We don't know this space," he said slowly. "Stick close to me, Til.
We might meet some more of that beast's pals. He's too much for us
physically, but damned if I don't believe we got more grey matter than
him and his whole tribe, if we use it right!"

They went along the black marble flooring for long minutes. The
thick drapes along the walls muffled their footsteps, but they cast
anxious glances behind them. The eerie silence that overhung the place
scratched at their uneasy nerves.

Mussdorf's hand vised on Gunn until the little man whimpered.

Behind them there was the slow shuffle of a mighty body.

"In here," snapped Mussdorf, drawing Gunn with him into a niche sculped
in the marble wall. They pressed back, drawing the drapes about them.
Biting on their tongues, they held their breaths.

The huge black body trod past, stirring the drapes and uncovering the
feet of the Earthmen. But he did not glance aside. Mussdorf and Gunn
let their breath out slowly, silently. They did not know that Irgi was
the last of his race, that he was used to loneliness, that he was not
given to looking away from his objective.

They peered out: saw the monster nearing two great bronze doors sculped
with forms of alien beauty. Watching breathlessly, they saw the doors
slide open untouched.

"Light beam," whispered Mussdorf.

They caught a glimpse of the Chamber of the Cones through the doorway;
saw with awe the great block of glimmering white, pulsing with an inner
fire. The ten glittering cones with their rings of shimmering light
made them gape.

They eased forward, and halted at the doors.

The black thing was pressing levers, working them swiftly. The great
cones began to hum softly, began to throb. They could feel that
terrific power pulsating through the room, making them quiver in rhythm
though they stood beyond its range. The faint azure haze darkened; grew
deeper, a dark blue. In broad bands of light the blue leaped from the
cones, poured outward over the room.

Irgi too, they saw. He lifted himself to his full height, turning and
pirouetting gracefully despite his bulk. He bathed in the light, and it
sprayed over and covered him.

"He's h'on h'a bat," croaked Gunn in hoarse excitement. "'E's getting
drunk on that stuff, whatever it is. A bender, a rip-snorting tear
'e's 'avin' for himself. Look at him. Like it was champagne he was
wallowin' in. Gawd--I could stand a snootful of that myself!"

He leaped swiftly, before Mussdorf could stop him.

Past the big man's outstretched arm he charged, full into the beating
bands of blue.

"Oh good Lord!" whispered Mussdorf.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before his eyes little Gunn stiffened in intolerable agony, straight
up, rigid. He hung that way for one long instant, immobile.

Then Gunn--disappeared.

Mussdorf blinked, and looked. The little pickpocket had been right
before him an instant ago. Now where he had been was nothing but those
pulsing ribbons on cobalt, pounding, beating, throbbing.

He's gone right in front of my eyes, Mussdorf thought. Evaporated. Into
thin air. No, not into air. Into that blue color. It just absorbed him,
like a blotter sops up ink!

Mussdorf knew cold fright, shuddering.

He whirled and ran, straight up the corridor toward the laboratory
door. It shot back before the thrust of his arms. He leaped for the
white tables as Emerson and Nichols stared at him, wondering at his
pale face.

Big brown hands seized on the straps that held Emerson, fighting to
burst them.

"Calm down, man," said Emerson evenly. "If those things could break,
I'd have broken them. Undo the buckles."

"Yeah, yeah. You're right," sobbed the big convict.

"What happened to you?"

"Not to me. To Gunn. Little Tilford Gunn. Gone. That--that damned black
beast killed him with his blue color. Right in front of my eyes. It's
going to take all of us to lick him. That's why I came back."

"What are you babbling about?" said Emerson softly. "Take your time,
man. What blue color?"

"In the big room up the corridor. There's a deep roar and splashes of
this deep light, as dark as a sapphire. Caught him, it did. Melted him
into nothing at all. I--I can't forget it."

He unsnapped the last buckle and stood silent as Emerson got up and
stretched. His chest heaved as he gasped for air.

He said suddenly, "We might as well get out of here while we can. If
that thing wants to experiment on us any more--the hell with him. Let's
go, and fast."

Emerson was freeing Nichols, smiling thinly, "What about your fortune,
Mussdorf? What about being a boss on Mars?"

Mussdorf licked his lips, whispering, "Hell with that. I just want to
get away from here, that's all. That black thing has power we've never
seen, never dreamed of. I tell you, those blue bands--"

Mussdorf swore.

Emerson whirled, reaching for his solar gun.

Irgi stood in the doorway, brooding at them. Almost he seemed to shake
his vast head, sadly.

"Stop him, one of you," babbled Mussdorf, striving to get past them.
"Maybe one of us can get away."

The thing stretched out his tentacles so swiftly that Emerson rasped
curses as his gun-arm was clapped and held tight against his side.
Nichols writhed beside him in another viselike arm. Mussdorf had
fainted.

Looking down at him, Emerson smiled thinly, and said to Nichols,
"Whatever happened to Gunn must have been pretty bad. They told me at
New Mars that Karl Mussdorf was pretty tough."

"Yeah," whispered Nichols.

Emerson looked up at the thing, studying it, thinking: maybe I can
get it to listen to me. Maybe it will even let us go free if I can
communicate with it.

"What're you going to do with us?" he questioned as calmly as he could.

The thing looked at him, and the thin mouth moved, but Valentine
Emerson heard no sound. The thing shook his head again, sadly.

       *       *       *       *       *

He could not make these beings understand that he was helping them,
Irgi realized. They cannot hear my voice because it is pitched lower
than their ears can detect. And even if they heard me, they would not
understand. I shall cure them of the growth disease. By that act, they
will know I am friendly. Time enough then to discuss other matters.
Matters like the building of a great statue to him, Irgi, greatest of
the Urg.

He carried them into the Chamber of the Cones; set them down gently.

The large one with the black hair and the shaggy brows was screaming
something. He was undergoing an emotion: anger. And fright, too. Yes,
the black haired one was frightened. More frightened than he was angry.
Irgi watched him curiously. He must have seen the little one blasted
when the Cones were pulsing.

It was too bad about that, Irgi thought as he trussed them up. But
these beings were so impetuous, almost childlike in their emotional
hysteria. He could not let them know that the Cones were set to pulse
in rhythm with his own body, not theirs. And anything foreign to that
peculiar vibration--perished. It simply ceased to exist, wiped out by
the flood of power loosed by the white block.

Irgi twisted dials on the instrument panel. He knew the rhythm of these
creatures, and adjusted to allow for it. This time the blue beam would
not harm them. Instead they would blast into nothingness the growth
disease that was slowly eating away their lives.

There was danger for Irgi, too, in this. He could not remain in the
Chamber to watch them. He must leave. He set the automatic regulators
to begin in five parazaw, last for one azaw, then switch back. After
that time, he could safely return, for the dark blue light and the
roaring hum would cease, and the cones would be idle.

Irgi glanced at the three beings. The black-haired one still raved,
but the others lay silent, watching him. He nodded approval. The
black-haired being was trying to loosen within the others the storms of
emotions that held him thrall, but they were of different stuff.

He went through the doors, and the doors slid shut.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson rasped, "Shut up!"

They lay silent for long moments. Emerson was studying the white block
and the cones and the spiralling, gleaming rings. He frowned, trying
to imagine their use. A tremendous powerhouse, of some sort. Probably
atomic power sucked from the white rock in some alien manner. Atomic
power that beat outward from the cones in bands of visible color. Could
it be a bath of atoms, bombarding everything in the room?

Mussdorf snarled, "I tell you he's going to do away with us like he did
with Gunn."

"Don't be a fool, man," answered Emerson wearily. "He wouldn't go to
all this trouble just to kill us. One quick wrench with those tentacles
of his, and we'd be dead ducks. He's got us in here for some reason.
I'm not denying he may be experimenting on us. But there ought to be
others joining with him in it. Funny, we haven't seen any others like
him."

"Look," said Nichols abruptly.

The white block was radiating, pulsing, casting forth bluish beams that
swept to the cones and fled outward in ever expanding arcs to splash
against the walls. The blue light deepened, grew violet. It pulsed
faster, swifter. And the humming of the cones was deafening.

"I don't feel anything," said Emerson. "I can still see you fellows.
Whatever it was happened to Gunn isn't happening to us."

He turned; found himself free of the straps, sat up. He clambered to
his feet and looked around.

"The straps that held us are gone. Disappeared. Like Gunn."

Mussdorf murmured oaths but he too got to his feet, asking, "What do we
do now?"

"Stay here and see what's next on the program. I still don't believe
that thing's out to harm us."

"Ahh, you always were a soft-hearted fool," Mussdorf snarled. "Why's he
going to all this bother to save us? It doesn't add up. This is some
fool scheme of his mad brain. He's no altruist. Not that black octopus.
Gad, what a shape!"

Nichols smiled wryly, "I believe we're just as peculiar to him as he
is to us. He talks and we can't even hear his voice. He may hear us,
but it's a cinch he doesn't know what we're talking about. Huh, it's
somewhat of a 'Never the twain shall meet' angle. East and West, and
that sort of thing."

"Only it's solar and star system," agreed Emerson, walking toward the
intricate control panels on the wall. He stretched an arm toward a
dial--

He paused, staring.

His arm. Good Lord, his _arm_!

"Nichols! Mussdorf," he shouted, leaping for them. "Let me see your
arms, your faces. Yes, you see? Mine, too. Free. Free of the lumps.
They're _gone_! The bumps that mean cancer--gone. We're cured!"

They stared in awed fascination at themselves. Nichols ripped at his
jacket, pulled it open, ran exploring hands over his skin. He sobbed
suddenly; began hysterically to cry, shoulders shaking.

"Whatever it is, it's cured us," whispered Emerson, turning to stare
upwards at the great glittering cones, that towered high above him.

"Ada and the kids," Nichols sobbed. "If they were here we could cure
them too."

"The world can be freed from the Plague," Emerson breathed.

"A fortune," grinned Mussdorf, eyes glinting.

Emerson said, "If we knew how this thing worked, we could set it up on
Earth. Duplicate it."

Mussdorf slid a hand over the butt of his solar gun. He smiled grimly.
"At a price, commander. Think of it. We'll be billionaires. That girl
in New Mars--bah! I could have girls ten times better than her, just
throwing themselves at me."

"We came to do a job," Emerson said flatly, "and we're going to see it
through."

Mussdorf tugged at his gun, lifting it, aiming it at Emerson's broad
chest.

"I'm tired of these damned ideals of yours," he grated savagely.
"You'll never change. Neither will I. The time for words is past. I'm
acting--"

His finger tightened on the trigger.

And Emerson dove in at him, like a fullback at the line.

The bolt of yellow never left the muzzle of the gun. It was smothered
in a cobalt-dark spray of angry color. Color that sizzled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson brought his fist up hard, caught the big adventurer alongside
his jaw, snapping his head back viciously. With hard lefts and rights,
Emerson banged his fists mercilessly, swarming over Mussdorf, bruising
his ribs, thudding home his big fists on jaw and belly.

Mussdorf dropped, rolled over: lashed upward with both feet.

Emerson sideswayed, drove in. His fists battered Mussdorf's jaw,
rolling his head from side to side. His knuckles gashed the tight
skin and drew blobs of blood. Mussdorf staggered dizzily, and pitched
forward as Emerson hammered his head again.

"I put up with you long enough," he spat at the prostrate man. "After
this, when I give an order, you--obey!"

Emerson bent, ripped the gun from Mussdorf; thrust it into his belt.

"But this is what we came to get," Nichols said. "This means
life--security--wealth--freedom from cancer--for all the people on
Earth and Mars."

"I know," Emerson nodded. "We'll have to take it."

He glanced up at the cones and shook his head. They were far too vast
to carry in the spaceship. He might duplicate them if he knew how they
worked, though.

"Quick," he rasped at Nichols. "Start hunting for
plans--blue-prints--anything that might tell what this apparatus is,
how it works, what its principle is."

They sprang about the room, searching the scrolls that hung on the
walls, the inscriptions graven in stone and metal. Off in one corner,
a great leaden casket lay in a niche. It was Emerson who found it, and
his yelp of delight brought Nichols running.

"It's here, all here. Diagrams. Calculations. All of them worked out
mathematically. They don't use our system, but it'll be easy enough to
decipher theirs. We've got it, Car!"

Nichols stood with head bent, lips soundlessly moving.

"It's atomic power, all right," assured Emerson, "with that block as
its source. But lord, what tremendous advances from the atomic power we
know. The block is acted upon by the cones which cause it to send out
streams of radioactive atoms, throwing them back to the cones that take
them up in turn to hurl them all around the room.

"Matter is constantly in motion, thanks to the molecules that comprise
it. They keep moving about one another eternally; in the case of
solids, they just about make it. That motion is carried on at a certain
rate of speed. To an extent, you might say it vibrates at a certain
pulse. If the atoms are attuned to that pulse, they feed and nourish.
If the matter vibrates at a different rate than the atoms, the atoms
destroy it. The straps that bound us are gone, but our clothes are
unaffected. Perhaps that's because the things we wear are tuned in
some manner to our own vibratory rate. Maybe it's because what we wear
comes from Earth, and things from Earth have their own peculiar motion.
I'm not sure, yet. But I do know anything that's in this room when the
cones are set at a certain pulse either vibrates in harmony with that
pulse or is wiped out of existence by the atoms that hit it. Like Gunn.
Like the cancer cells that vibrated differently from our otherwise
healthy bodies!"

"The block," whispered Nichols. "We'll need the block!"

"Certainly. It's radium, in all probability--perhaps treated in some
manner we don't know of. But we can take it. It'll fit into this box.
The box was made for it. It's lead."

The doors were opening soundlessly. Warned by eyes upon him, Emerson
whirled and dove for the cone controls. He set a hand on a lever and
turned to face the thing.

"I don't know whether you can hear me, fella," he grated. "But this
thing is tuned to _our_ bodies now, not yours. We want that block--"
jerking his head toward the shimmering white square, "--to take with
us. If you don't step aside--you die!"

"Kill him anyhow," whispered Nichols.

"Yes, you soft fool," snarled Mussdorf through swollen, cut lips from
the floor. "Pull the lever and do away with him."

Emerson shook his head, still looking at the thing that stood so still
in the doorway, staring back at him.

"That would be murder. He's an intelligent being. If he doesn't
interfere, he stays alive."

The black monster turned, and moved off down the corridor. Emerson
exhaled with relief, found his palm wet and sticky. He rubbed it on his
thigh, turning to the others.

"Snap into it," he barked. "Get off the floor, Mussdorf, and give
Nichols a hand. Lug that leaden box between the cones, beneath the
block. I'm going to release the pressure that keeps it suspended. We
want that block. We need it. We can build the cones and the rings back
on Earth, but there isn't anything like that block anywhere else in all
the Universe!"

       *       *       *       *       *

They worked feverishly, sliding the box across the floor. Emerson
studied the control panels, sweat beading his brow with the effort of
his concentration. He summoned the years of his tutelage under the
world's greatest physicists at Earth University, the years of knowledge
acquired in laboratory and spaceship on Earth and in the great red city
of New Mars. He only had one chance here. It had to be successful. If
he made a mistake, he was like to draw on them the concentrated fury of
a billion annihilating atoms.

He touched levers hesitantly, frowning; striving to remember the
diagrams etched in metal on the box. Here, this one. This should be it.
He wrapped his fingers carefully about the gleaming white knob, turned
it with infinitesimal slowness, looking at the great white block. He
saw it quiver, settle slowly floorwards.

"It's in," yelled Nichols, slamming the leaden cover down and locking
it.

It took the three of them to budge it, to slide it across the floor.

"Hell," panted Mussdorf. "We'll never make it. Once we get it into the
corridor, that black fiend'll be on top of us again."

Somehow they got it out of the Chamber, and scraped it along the
corridor. Luckily, the way was level, and the ramp that lead from the
Chamber of the Cones to the great square was smooth. But in the square
they ran into an unsurmountable difficulty. There was no way to lift it
into the spaceship.

"We can't do it," acknowledged Emerson glumly. "It would take a crane
to lift that."

Mussdorf kicked at the box, and swore. Nichols ran quivering fingers
through his hair, trembling.

Then Emerson started to grin.

"A crane, sure. We have one here, if we can only make it work. The
thing, the black thing. He's as strong as any crane I ever saw!"

"Think he'll do it?" asked Mussdorf.

"I can try. Maybe a threat to use the solar blasters on him will do
the trick."

He really didn't think so, recalling the way the black being had
sidestepped the bolts before; but it was their only hope. He pulled his
two guns and turned; stopped short, staring.

The black creature was coming down the ramp, slithering his great bulk
toward them. He ignored them, heading directly toward the leaden box.

Irgi lifted the leaden casket in three of his rippling tentacles,
balancing it. He moved toward the spaceship, thrust the box through the
open door.

Emerson frowned. He went to the thing, touching it and looking upward
into its eyes.

The thing looked down at Emerson unblinking. It pointed to the
transparent globe above, then patted Emerson on his wrist with a force
that nearly snapped it.

"He's going to open the globe for us. He's going to set us free!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Irgi watched the ship twinkle to a glittering dot high in the heavens.
Sadly he turned and moved back along the empty corridors, once again
alone.

He wished they were still here, even though he never could understand
them. At least they were beings who moved, and talked among themselves,
showed emotions. But what a strange world they came from! A world where
heroes were worshipped, where tall strong statues were built to the
great men of their race. Irgi liked that idea, though it was foreign
to Urg. He rather thought there would be a statue to him, there on
that planet called Earth. Yes, for the beings would tell how Irgi
helped them, how he gave them the white block that would save them from
extinction, even though it meant his own death, eventually.

Irgi was happy. There was no doubt of it. There would be a fine
statue to him on that distant planet. Irgi, savior of the race called
men. A hero to mankind, to be worshipped. He wished wistfully that
he could have been there to see it. But he was afraid of unleashing
those creatures' terror. They might even have done something rash to
themselves, if he had crowded his bulk into the spacecraft.

No, it was better this way.

       *       *       *       *       *

And in the spaceship, Emerson and Mussdorf and Nichols squatted over
the leaden casket, commenting on it, copying the alien symbols and
designs for study.

Emerson frowned thoughtfully, choosing his words.

"As near as I can judge, it's a form of atomic bombardment of matter.
Suppose its rate of vibration is adjusted to matter _a_. Anything other
than matter _a_, such as foreign substance _b_, is hit so swiftly
and so often by those hurtling atoms that they simply wipe it out of
existence.

"Back in the twentieth century, they were using just this principle
to cure cancer. They bombarded the cancer with radioactive
atoms--overcrowding the atoms with neutrons beyond their ability to
hold them for very long--and the atoms ate away the cancer. I think
they treated other diseases too, with some success. Goiter, for one.
And, if I recall rightly, the atoms could build up blood cells or
eliminate them.

"But this block and the cones seem to be the ultimate perfection of
that idea. Maybe atoms possess some degree of intellect, for all we
know. We'll never really be sure. They do have a power of attraction,
and appear to be drawn to the danger spot as though magnetized to it."

They were silent, thoughtful.

"Yeah," said Mussdorf at last. "It begins to trickle through. Gunn
wasn't in harmony with that black beast, so he went out of existence
immediately. Gunn was human and the other wasn't."

Emerson nodded, and his eyes widened.

"My God!" he whispered. "This block and the cones could make a man
immortal!"

Mussdorf gagged; laughed suddenly.

"Then why did that thing let us cart it off right from under its nose?
Why, he even helped us."

"I wish I knew," muttered Emerson, troubled. "I wish I knew."

Mussdorf scowled; looked at him sideways, clearing his throat.

"I'm sorry I went off my nut back there," he mumbled. "The thought
of all the dough this thing was worth sort of slapped me haywire.
Why, just to be free of space cancer, Val--and hell! They'll give us
pensions for this job. I'm sorry."

"Skip it," said Emerson. "That black thing was enough to make us all
jittery. He seemed a good enough egg, though. But I was a little
disappointed in him. He sure was bluffed when I touched that lever.
Boy, he turned tail fast enough."

"Maybe he was just what he looked like, Val," murmured Nichols
thoughtfully. "An animal--left by the real builders of the Cones to
turn it over to someone like us, with a use for it."

"Sure," nodded Mussdorf. "That's what he was. Car's hit it. Just a big
animal who knew enough to work the things, and no more."

       *       *       *       *       *

Irgi was alone, and cold. It would get steadily colder for him, without
the block to feed his body. But Irgi kept smiling. He would be a hero
someday. There would be a statue to him.

Again he wished that he could see it. But he knew he would never be
happy on Earth. There would always be the fear that the earthmen seemed
to have. To Irgi, it seemed a silly sort of fright, too. They were
always on the verge of harming themselves. As in the Chamber of the
Cones when that one had placed his hand on the lever to loose the fury
of the cones. Why had he done that? And those others urging him to pull
it! Did fear turn those beings into madmen? Didn't they know that they
would have blasted themselves to nothingness? They must have known that
the controls would automatically shift back to his own vibratory rate,
not theirs. The machine had been built for him. In rest, it was tuned
to his pulse.

He had been afraid for them, and so had gone away, leaving them to
slide the box as best they could. He had meant to carry it for them,
since it was best that a race carry on instead of one lone Urgian. For
Irgi would die without the block. Well, it was like exchanging one form
of immortality for another. But he still wished he could have seen that
statue.

"_An animal_," said Emerson heavily. "_Well, maybe you're right. Just
an animal, scared of three men. Let's forget him._"

       *       *       *       *       *

Irgi shivered.

It was growing colder....





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Monster, by Gardner F. Fox

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST MONSTER ***

***** This file should be named 63645.txt or 63645.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/6/4/63645/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
