The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man the Sun-Gods Made, by Gardner F. Fox

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Man the Sun-Gods Made

Author: Gardner F. Fox

Release Date: November 20, 2020 [EBook #63824]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN THE SUN-GODS MADE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       THE MAN THE SUN GODS MADE

                           By GARDNER F. FOX

               They called him a god and worshipped him.
              He neither ate nor drank, nor breathed the
                wild free air, yet he was mighty beyond
            belief. But grief bowed those superbly-muscled
                 shoulders, for he knew he was human.

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Planet Stories Winter 1946.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Tyr stood on the warm white sands and stretched. The hot yellow rays of
the sun played across his ribbed chest and the muscles in his long legs
and thick arms. Tyr smiled. It was good to be alive, even if he was a
god.

He wondered when they would come to worship him again, sending the
bittersweet keening of the _suota_-horns out across the silver deserts
and blue lakes of Lyallar. He hoped it would be soon, for he had,
despite himself, grown to like sitting on the ruby throne. From where
he stood, looking across the groined vastness of the Lord Chamber,
he could see the upturned faces of his people. Even the rat-face of
Otho he liked at moments like those, for the wondrously beautiful face
of Fay smiled red-lipped at him. Tyr gave many gifts to Fay from the
treasures that the Lyallar heaped upon him. And always it seemed she
was eager for more, her brown eyes flickering like those of a greedy
child.

Tyr spread his arms, feeling millions of tiny nerve-ends in his skin
open to drink in the energy pouring from the titanic orb of fire in
the heavens that was sun to the planet Lyallar. Tyr ate no food, and
breathed no air. All that he needed for his existence he got from the
sun.

As the energy flooded into him, making him tingle in every fibre of his
being, Tyr felt again the effect of that energy on his brain. It was
as though the power he fed on was so great that it opened the deeper
spaces of his mind so that any problem was no problem at all--while the
moment lasted.

He had found the stone tower in a moment like that. Seen it at first
miles away, standing lone and stark on the silver sand. Built of
brownish rock, round as the bole of a tree, it was something new to him
who had explored all the strange places of this planet. Tyr had run to
it, testing his swift feet. He could have distanced a dozen cheetahs,
one after another, could Tyr. He was more than swift. He was inhuman.

The lock was easy to break with all that energy flooding him. He merely
took it in his big hands and his muscles writhed and bulged, and the
flaky red metal of the lock snapped. With the flat of a hand he pushed
open the door and went within. It was dim and cool inside, and at first
Tyr did not like it.

There were queer objects all about him, some of glass, some of metal.
Here were curves and cones and vibrating rods of the thickness of
a man's little finger. And books! Even the libraries of the Trylla
contained no books such as these. He lifted one down and browsed, and
found that his mind was understanding it, knowing what those terms and
symbols meant, without thinking. His mind frightened Tyr at times. It
was almost not a part of him. It was as though all the men and women
who had been his forebears had left a little something of themselves in
his makeup, so that their knowledge and experience could guide their
descendant.

Many hours Tyr spent in that odd place. It was a change from the
deserts and the ruby throne. Gradually, through the years, he found
that he was amassing an education from the books and the glass and
metal objects--

_Suu-ohhh-taaaa!_

       *       *       *       *       *

The clarion notes rang sweet and clear. They brought Tyr erect, the
peculiar ring chained to his neck bouncing on his chest. He looked
toward the dim horizon, where stood Yawarta, city of the ruby throne.

This was the call to the god of the Lyallar. Tyr ran easily, like a
perfect machine that never tired. Across the white sands, and through
the eerie forest in which all the trees resembled frost-flakes,
silver-white in the sun. Deep in the heart of the forest lay an azure
pool, its blueness contrasting startlingly with the silver of the
forest.

The towers of Yawarta were slim and dark beyond the grassy fields. Like
drops of blood on a satin pillow they brooded, reminding the Tryllan
race that they were slaves to the _ardth_ who dwelt far beyond the
nearest star.

A girl was standing before a golden door set flush with the hillside.

"Fay!"

"Speak not, on your life!" she whimpered.

They stood silent, breathing softly. Tyr heard the voices then, harsh
voices, where the Tryllans spoke in musical syllables.

"The _ardth_! They have returned?"

"Yes. They swear to kill you, Tyr. They are hunting you now, along the
tunnels to the door."

Tyr bent and swung the girl high on his chest, grinning. "They will
never catch Tyr."

Tyr began to run. His legs blurred with the speed of his motion. He
stepped out along the grassy slope, and down it, and then was running
free on the plains. He heard Fay's gasp as she grew aware of his pace.
She buried her head against his shoulder to breathe, and her yellow
hair whipped and stung his face as the wind tossed it.

For four hours Tyr ran, not needing to breathe. When he swung the girl
down, he was as composed as though he had moved ten feet. Fay stared up
at him with warm brown eyes.

"Truly you are a god, Tyr. Only a god could run without effort."

"No god. Only--only--"

He halted. He had no word to describe himself. Neither did the Trylla,
except "god." So god he had become, unwillingly; yet he was dimly aware
that he was unique among men, that he stood alone.

"We are far from the Old Ones, the _ardth_, here," he said. "It would
be easy to dwell here on the deserts until they have left."

Fay stirred restlessly, saying, "I do not want to stay on the deserts.
They are bare places. No people, no laughter."

"I don't blame you. There must be something I can do."

He rubbed his hands on the soft white fur that clasped his hips. A hot
anger was beating up inside him, making his nostrils flare. The Old
Ones! They had come back to Lyallar, where Tyr ruled! The masters of
planets and the far reaches of space had come back. He was one, and the
_ardth_ were many. Individually, nothing could ever defeat him. But one
against a race! He shook his head.

"You could fight them, Tyr. You are a god. What can the Old Ones do to
you? There is no way of killing you. Sometimes an assassin has tried,
while you sat on the ruby throne. But no one has ever succeeded."

That was true. Yet he did not tell her that his own uncanny speed saved
him. There was no sense in testing fate, by letting a weapon strike
him. He had a subtle knowledge that he might be immune to certain types
of missiles, but he was not sure.

"You could walk into Yawarta and slay them all, Tyr," the girl said
softly, watching him carefully with her brown eyes. "Then we could go
back to the old days. You could give me that emerald necklace I want."

Tyr wondered at the greed in the brown eyes. It disturbed him. But it
did not disturb him as much as the thoughts of the Old Ones. Thought
of them brought a yearning for battle that rose red and mist-like
inside his great chest. How to tell of that hotness within him, where
his guts ought to be, but were not, that made his heart pump with fury?
Yet, despite his rage, he was alert and careful as a stalking cat. He
could not tell this to Fay; she wanted him to walk unarmed into Yawarta
and blast the _ardth_ with some sort of supernatural power.

He walked around on the white sand, brooding at his moving feet. He
looked into his mind for the words, stumbling and halting.

"Fay, the Trylla have made of me a god. Now I know I am no god. I am
not such a god as the legends of the Tryllan cults tell of, at any
rate. I am only a man. A human being, who is something of a freak."

There was a patient smile on the girl's red mouth. She shook her head
and the soft yellow hair tumbled around her bare shoulders.

"We have spoken of this before, Tyr. Always you say that you are not a
god, and then you turn around and do what only a god can do."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tyr sighed. "Maybe I am a god. Maybe I expect a god to be too much. But
that is not exactly the point. It is this: the Trylla call me god, no
matter what I call myself. Therefore I must act like a god, for their
sake."

Fay nodded, brown eyes fastened on him.

Tyr said slowly, "A god would not let oppressors molest his people,
would he, Fay?"

"That is just what I have said. You must go into Yawarta and slay and
slay--"

"No. No, I do not think that is what a god would do."

Fay frowned slightly. She kicked at a lump of sand and watched it fly
apart. She ran a finger into her thick yellow hair and twirled it.

"Of course you may be right," she said tartly. "I am not versed in the
way of gods."

"Nor am I," scowled Tyr. "But, in the heart of me, something says there
is another way. That, if I can convince the _ardth_ that I could defeat
them, smash them in some way--then what would be the triumph of a god."

"That might take a long time. I would like very much to have that
emerald necklace. Otho said it was worn by Queen Yatha-sath two
thousand years ago. Please, Tyr?"

She came close to him, perfumed warmth and soft white skin. Her mouth
was very red. But Tyr looked away, frowning.

"The Old Ones derive their powers from a thing called science," he
said slowly. "It says so in a book in the Tower. If I could learn that
science, I might defeat them with their own weapons. But that would
take a long time. Many years."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stared up into the sun and smiled gently, feeling its hot rays lave
his chest and arms and thighs. Like bubbles of air surging up through
water, he felt the dormant strength of his muscles. He had strength. A
strong man can fight with his hands and with his legs. He would fight.

He turned sharply to Fay and asked, "What is the Barrow that the Trylla
often mention? Where is it?"

"The Barrow is the pride of the Trylla. Without it there would be no
hope."

"Yes, yes. I know. But what _is_ it?"

"It is the hidden place where all the wartime secrets of the race are
stored. When the last invasion of the Old Ones took place, nearly a
hundred years ago, all the accumulated knowledge of the conquered
Tryllans was locked away lest the Old Ones destroy it."

"Could you find the Barrow?"

Fay shuddered. Tyr looked at her, saw her fingers move through her
yellow hair, watched with gentle smile as white teeth nibbled at red
lip. He put out his big hands and held her arms.

"It is for the Trylla that I ask."

"I--I know. I can find the Barrow." Her chin lifted defiantly. "Of what
use are old legends if they make those who hear them weaklings and
cowards? Better to--to die bravely than to hole up like the _tabbug_ at
the first cry of the hunting-cat!"

Tyr grinned at her, wondering if she believed in her own words. She was
so lovely, so childishly greedy for pretty things, so--he frowned at
the idea--so unconsciously selfish, wrapped in her own interests, that
abstract terms like bravery and cowardice seemed alien to her tongue.
Her brown eyes flirted up at him from under their long lashes, and
caught his warm grin.

She muttered sullenly, "The Barrow is five days' journey from the
Desert of the Dead, and that lies two days' travelling from here."

"So near?"

"Much of the journey is across terrible deserts, and the rest is over
insurmountable mountain barriers. The Barrow is atop the tallest
mountain on all the planet."

"That makes it so much harder for the Old Ones to find it," Tyr said.

"The Old Ones can fly. The Trylla must walk. Our monorails run only
in the cities. Oh, Tyr, the only way you can win is to go into the
chambers of Yawarta and destroy the leading _ardth_. You can do it no
other way!"

"If Harl the Ancient still lives," Tyr dreamed, "he could help me
fight. He was the greatest of the Tryllan warriors. There are rumors he
does live, in the Barrow. That is why I must find it. I need Harl."

The girl nibbled at her red mouth sullenly, saying, "I don't see why
you don't do as I say. In that way, you'd get to power faster. We
wouldn't have to share the glory with Harl."

"The _ardth_ aren't bowling pins to fall at the sway of an arm, Fay.
They are dangerous men. Wise men with enough savagery in their blood to
make them vicious."

Tyr knew he could never hope to walk into the secret chambers of the
_ardth_ alive. He knew his limitations. He was human, after a fashion.
He bled when cut, and he ached when bruised. And the _ardth_--

The _ardth_ were a strange race. They were nomads who swept across the
trails of the stars in great vessels that spanned a bridge of space
from planet to planet. Never happy for long, they were eaten by a
cancerous unrest that drove them on and on, to the outermost rims of
the galaxies, hunting always.

They had home planets, too, but they were seldom at home. Instead
they chose to lock themselves in ships of metal and fling themselves
out between the suns. Instead of green grass and trees, their windows
looked on blackness relieved only by twinkling dots that were stars,
and steadily glowing pinpricks that were unexplored planets.

Five hundred years ago they had come to Lyallar. The Tryllans, then a
great race, had fought them bitterly and had driven them off. Three
hundred years later, they came again; this time they came for war.
That war lasted seventy-two years and, at its end, the Tryllans were
a broken race. And that time the Old Ones stayed, or, rather, their
cities stayed--and the Glow.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one really knew what the Glow was. It made the Old Ones powerful,
and was as closely guarded by them as was the Barrow by the Trylla.
Without the Glow, the _ardth_ were naught. They hid the Glow deep in
their biggest city, that they named Mart.

"If we could go to Mart and find this Glow," said Tyr abruptly, out of
his deep thought.

Fay laughed bitterly, "The Barrow one can find by rolling downhill,
compared to finding the Glow and using it."

Tyr grunted. It was hard, being a god.

Sometimes he wished he were like other men, for then he would have no
people to protect, no Old Ones to battle for a race that looked to him
for guidance. Often he had thought that the Old Ones might be gods, but
he knew that none of them could do what he could do.

His godship prodded him into saying, "Let us find the Barrow, and Harl."

"Harl is old, very old," replied the girl. "He is so old that he must
be a doddering gaffer now."

"But his brain would be young," Tyr argued. "And it is the brain that
is trained in war from which I seek aid."

The girl sat on a rock and undid a sandal and shook sand from it. She
shrugged petulantly and fastened her sandal. "Must we go now? It is
almost night."

Tyr looked at the sun low on the horizon. Tyr did not like to travel by
night. He preferred the hot day, when the sunrays beat with insistent
heat about his tanned chest and shoulders. But there was need for
hurry. The Old Ones did not stop for darkness, and neither would he.

"Come," he said shortly.

The way was easy, at first. In the red light of the dying sun, they
saw the sand before them, each rise and dip moulded into graceful
curves by the winds that whipped the barrens night and day. They went
lightly, swiftly.

Slowly the stars loomed in the darkening sky above them. And, as is the
way with travellers the worlds over, they grew silent and more intimate
in unspoken thought. Once or twice Fay's hand brushed Tyr's, and he
helped her across the higher dunes.

On a hard swirl of sand, they stood close. Fay whispered, "All those
stars, Tyr. You would think the Old Ones would be satisfied with so
many. They might leave Lyallar alone!"

Tyr felt surprise at the emotion within him. It was almost a sympathy
with the nomad oppressors.

"They have curiosity. I have it myself. I have lived on every desert
that Lyallar can boast, yet I am ever searching for a bigger and a
hotter one. Maybe the Old Ones are like that."

He looked down at the girl, smiling wistfully at the pale loveliness of
her hair, at the warm brown of her eyes. He shivered, watching her. He
wanted so much to take Fay and go out into the desert with her, away
from everything that smacked of godhood. They could go to the Tower,
and live there safely. The _ardth_ would not find him there. There
would be none to say him yea or nay. If--he was a god!

Tyr sighed and turned from Fay's red mouth and looked out across the
unending dunes. An inner voice whispered, _The Trylla need you, Tyr.
You are their god, and a god does not run away. When is a god needed
more than in time of trouble? You cannot leave them, for they are as
children. You must fight._ He nodded in the darkness, grimly.

Side by side they went on through the night. And now they went apart
from each other, as though the decision were a final parting. Words
were unnecessary. The Trylla needed Tyr.

It was dawn when they saw the others trudging wearily across a far bank
of sand. Tyr shouted and waved, summoning them. Dragging deadened limbs
they came, in torn clothes and with smears and streaks of dirt on gaunt
faces. They stood before him, and in their eyes was the dull glaze of
despair and in their voices the sullen acceptance of their fate.

"We fled after seeing the _ardth_ ships come."

"They will find us, though. We want just a few more days of freedom."

"All of Yawarta is captive to them. They have made Otho governor, and
thrown Zarman, whom you appointed ruler, into the cells."

"And they have sent out commands that you be returned to them at once.
They have offered rewards."

Tyr grinned mirthlessly, shaking his tawny head. A return meant
torture, possibly death. If the Old Ones thought enough of him, they
might feed him to the Glow.

He said, "Fay and I are bound for the Barrow. We will find Harl and
call him to lead new armies against the _ardth_. Join with us. We shall
win."

"We cannot win ... alone."

They looked at him out of dull eyes in which tiny flames of hope sprang
alive and flickered, and then died. They shuffled their feet. They
looked tired enough to fall, and the bare soles of several bled red
drops into the sands.

"Sleep," said Tyr gently. "You need rest. Dawn is coming up, and I can
go on in the sunlight to survey the path before us."

He drew Fay with him, over the crest of a dune. His fingers rose to
touch the circlet of dull gold that gleamed from the chain about his
neck. Slowly he unfastened it as Fay watched, staring. The ring was a
part of him, for he had worn it ever since he could remember. Now he
wanted Fay to wear it. It bruised his ribs when he ran, or bounced on
his back and against his jaw. But more than that, every Tryllan knew
that ring. It would be a symbol of power in Fay's hands.

"Use it well," he said, closing her white fingers about it.

Her brown eyes were wide, looking up at him. Tyr put out his hands and
caught her arms above her elbows. He held her like that, just looking
at her beauty, for a long moment.

And then he turned and ran swiftly, lest the muffled thunder of his
blood should smash the resolutions his brain had welded so firmly.


                                  II

Sand slipped away in back of him, as wind passes the arrow in its
flight. Air was cool on his chest and on the powerful thighs that
rippled with muscles as he ran. The sun beat at him, leaving him in its
warmth. He grew strong and powerful as the cells of his skin sucked in
energy.

Run, Tyr. Run faster and yet faster, that the thoughts teeming in your
brain may be left behind. You are a god, and a girl named Fay is not
for you. You have only the _ardth_-men, Tyr. They are your enemies, and
they must be vanquished!

But how? But how? His brain howled in desperation. They are so many.
They know sciences, and they have weapons. You have two bare hands and
a strong body, a strange body, a body that frightens you at times, it
is so different.

Something dug into the sand ahead of him and exploded. Tyr swerved like
a frightened faun and came to a stop. Something else blew up a little
closer to him. Hard granules of sand stung his flesh.

He saw them, then, in the sky. Three sleek aircraft with stubby wings
and a long fuselage out of which shot tiny glints of red.

The _ardth_!

Tyr drew his hands down his ribs, lips twisted. By the god that he was
supposed to be! He'd show them a race, even if they could fly and he
could only run.

The sun was hot and searing. Good! It was his ally, that immense orb.
While it shone, they could not catch him.

Tyr ran.

His pace was a blurred thing. His flight was that of the _kala_-bird
whistling before the hawk. He swerved and he darted, and he made
fools of the men in the shiny things above and behind him. It was an
incredible thing that he did, but Tyr was an incredible being. The
rules were not made for him, for who made the rules knew nothing of
Tyr. He outran those aircraft.

All day long, while the sun beat upon him, Tyr flew. Vaguely he
realized that he was a living, functioning thing of energy--not pure
energy, but energy translated into human power.

Yet he was human, and the fliers were machines. He lost them among
the rocks, but the aircraft spread in widening circles and one of them
found him again. And so Tyr ran on. Once or twice he stumbled, toward
the end of the day. The thunder of the jet planes was loud in his ears.
They swooped low, casting long shadows before them.

There were no more explosions. Those had stopped once he began his mad
race. He thought, 'At least, Fay and the others are safe. I've led the
_ardth_ a long way from them.' The muscles in his legs were hardening,
knotting. They grew heavy and inert.

Tyr staggered.

The planes had landed, and the men were coming for him. The
stars-and-bars on their jackets loomed bigger and bigger as he stood
and waited. His chest rippled with sweat, and his long arms hung limp
on either side of his giant frame.

He could fight and die here, with the moon starting its rise in front
of him, and the wilderness of his run behind him. His body was pouring
the energy through his system again, and his muscles grew less heavy.

"By Kagan!" swore the first _ardth_-man, staring at him with round eyes
over the muzzle of a lifted gun. "Who are you, man? _What_ are you?"

"He's their god," rasped another, appraising Tyr with knowing eyes.

"No wonder," grunted the third, holstering his weapon. "A god such as
he would find me among his worshippers! They'll never believe us on
Rigel-7!"

"Do you yield?" asked the first.

They did not seem so frightening, close up. They were like Tyr. They
were men, smaller than he, but men. He could kill them all, here and
now, but--

He owned a desire to see more of these _ardth_. Perhaps he could
reason with their commander, make some sort of compromise. He would do
anything to save the Trylla. Fay and the others were safe. Let them go
to the Barrow. He would know where to find them when he escaped from
the _ardth_. And he would escape. There was no prison made that could
hold Tyr.

He said slowly, "I yield. I will go with you."

Dully, despite all his hopes and plans, he knew himself a complete and
total failure as a god.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her hair was black as the tip of a raven's wing, parted in the middle,
and drawn back over tiny ears. She had black eyes and a wide, crimson
mouth that kept smiling at him, gently. She stood in the midst of the
cloaked _ardth_-men who stared at him as they listened to the voices of
the airmen who had captured him.

Tyr grew uncomfortable under her steady gaze. He shifted his feet,
feeling silly, looming so big above the smaller pilots. He felt that
they all were laughing at him. What a god he was! No wonder they
laughed at him secretly. A god who was the protector of his race,
allowing capture by three pilots he could have killed with three blows
of his big hands.

The eyes and the mockery of the men he did not mind, but the steady
eyes of the woman--

Forget her, and look about you, Tyr. This is a room of the Old Ones,
with its silver and black-glass windows arching a hundred feet up along
the wall, and the hooded eagle design carven into the stone and wood.
A highbacked chair stood empty on a rostrum as the man who usually
filled it stood with the others, watching him. This was wealth, from
the priceless red damask drapes at the windows to the hand-laid tiles
beneath his feet.

It was no use. Her dark eyes were too steady.

"A lie," said one of the Old Ones calmly. "No man could do what he did."

"He is no man, sire. He is the one the Trylla worship. He is--Tyr!"

They started at that. The pilot had told his story cleverly. He grinned
with self-appreciation as the murmurs and the cries rewarded him. Tyr
knew the closer scrutiny of the eyes beneath drawn brows. They ate him
up, those eyes. Especially the eyes of the woman.

A lean man with a bald head and iron-grey mustache stepped forward
and walked around Tyr, his glittering eyes probing. Shaking his head
dubiously, he said, "Katha, you're our biochemical expert. Can it be?"

The woman with the black hair came toward him, swaying gracefully.

"I must make tests, Space Commander," she said, and Tyr liked the
hoarse vibrancy of her voice. It sent tingles down his spine. But maybe
that was the black eyes of her that smiled up at him as she asked, "Is
it true, what he says?"

"Yes, it's true. I outran their planes. I could have killed them, but I
did not choose to."

"Then why didn't you?" she smiled.

"Because I--show me to your commander. I want to treat with him. That
is why I suffered capture. I will offer peace for peace. All I ask--"

The lean man with the bald head came around in front of Tyr and stared
at him with cold eyes.

"I am Space Commander Ronald Mason," he said flatly. "I am in charge of
Expeditionary Space Force to the Fornax Cluster. You will offer peace?
But there is no war."

Tyr held the snarl in his throat as he replied, "But there will be war,
unless the _ardth_ are willing to deal with me for the liberty of the
Trylla."

Mason smiled, but Tyr saw the flecks of passion deep in his ice-blue
eyes. "The Trylla are a free race."

Tyr said patiently, "The Trylla worship me. They think I am a god. I
know, and you know, that I am nothing of the sort. Yet I would help
them, if I could. You cannot keep me here, if I seek to escape. I can
plunge this planet into the bloodiest war you ever saw. But I do not
want to do that. I seek only peace. Peace, and some sort of pride for
the Trylla, that they may once again hold up their heads--"

Mason interposed, "A laudable desire. But the Trylla are quite content.
Otho tells me they will make no trouble. As for your idle boast of
escaping--"

Space Commander Mason gestured and turned away with, "Test him, Katha.
See why his responses vary so far from the norm."

Red anger beat up in Tyr in mounting pulsings. He bit into his lip and
eased up to the tips of his toes. His muscles writhed. He--

A cool hand touched his forearm. The black eyes were there again, and
the red mouth was smiling at him.

"The tests? Please?"

Tyr licked his lips, confused. He looked at the _ardth_, and down at
the girl, whose eyes were sapping the mad rage in his heart. He said,
"Yes, the tests."

"Follow me."

       *       *       *       *       *

The room was big and white, and fantastically clean. Chrome and
plasticine gleamed and shone under the bluish-white ceiling that
diffused soft brightness into every corner. A fluoroscope machine
stood against the north wall. On tables were set scalpels and needles
and rolls of cotton. Electronic ray-machines, microscopes and
cyclotroncancereas peered beyond them. This was the biochemical science
of the Old Ones inside four walls.

Katha closed the door behind her and loosed her black cloak. She was
garbed in black blouse with a star-and-bar in silver threaded into the
material. Tight trousers, white, gave her a streamlined look.

"Be comfortable, please. This will not hurt, what I am about to do."

Tyr watched her roll a big machine out, saw her thrust a needle with
a handle into a jar of white liquid. She saw him watching her, and
laughed softly.

"You are like a caged animal. You do not like walls, do you?"

"No. I prefer the desert."

"You have spent all your life on the desert?"

"All. Ever since I was small."

She turned from a wad of cotton that she was unrolling to regard him
thoughtfully from under long black lashes.

"A boy. What of your parents?"

"I don't remember them, if there were any to remember. The first thing
I recall is sand under my feet, and running. The sun was always my
friend. I love the sun. It feeds me. I need nothing to exist, other
than the sun."

Her left hand was warm where it caught his wrist. The damp cotton was
swept across his flesh swiftly.

"I remember a lot of things about my youth. Unconnected things, like
the first day I found the blue lake and the silver forest. The day I
killed a _panth_ with my bare hands. The first night I saw the stars,
and recognized them for what they were."

Katha held his hand in hers and said, "I am going to draw blood. It
will hurt--a little." As the ruby liquid oozed from his wrist, the
woman went on speaking. "And you cannot recall anything beyond that?
Only that you were a boy, and that you grew up?"

"Only that. It was many years before I saw another ... human. The
Trylla are not desert-dwellers. They like their cities. But I saw a
caravan, and came close to examine it, and when the guards saw me, I
ran so swiftly they started rumors."

Her mouth smiled in amusement as she walked across the room.

"No wonder. A man who can outrun three aircraft is quite a runner."

"From that began the tales about me. A hunter would shoot and miss.
That started my invincibility legend. After many years, during which I
found the Tower, they sent a delegation to me, to ask me to be their
god, to take the ruby throne."

"How did you learn to speak, if you never knew other men and women?"

Tyr paused. Some of his education he had gotten from the books in
the Tower. His other knowledge, and it was vast, he secured from
eavesdropping in the narrow alleys of Yawarta.

But he said, "Oh, I just picked it up."

"The tower you mention. What is that?"

"An old building I broke into. It stands by itself on the Desert of the
Whipping Wind."

"Can you read?"

"No," he lied.

She was sliding a splinter of glass under a frosted screen, and
depressing a button, and bending. Tyr watched, wondering what she
sought.

"That is too bad," she murmured. "For if you--you--you--ohh!"

Her face whitened as she stared at him.

"What is it?"

"Your blood ... if it is blood. It is so--so different!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Katha put out a white hand and deflected a switch on the wall. A
section of panelling slid back, disclosing a screen on which stood the
three-dimensional images of the black-cloaked men in the throne room.

"Space Commander, I must see you. Already the preliminary test has
disclosed revolutionary reactions."

Her voice was excited. It made the bald, lean man jump a little. Tyr
saw him stride toward him, loom larger and larger, walk out of the
screen and--disappear. A moment later, the laboratory door opened and
Mason entered.

"What is it, Katha?" he said coolly.

"His blood. It is not blood that we know, that carries food and
oxygen, and the toxics. It is alien. The cell structure is apparently
designed to transmit--this is going to sound silly, and I haven't the
opportunity of checking my first impressions, to make sure--but the
cells appear constructed to transmit pure energy in the form of sheer
heat."

"But the tissues, girl! In a normal man the food becomes energy in the
tissues. How--?"

"I don't know. Look for yourself."

She stood away from the microscope, gesturing toward it. Space
Commander Mason bent to the screen. His right hand raised the
electronic power a hundred units. He stood like that for many minutes,
frowning, scarcely breathing. When he straightened, he looked at Tyr
for a long time, breathing harshly.

He said, "It seems to be a blood that carries nothing but radiating
heat pulses. That means he intakes his energy pure. The efficiency rate
is perfect. Katha, he isn't a man. Not a man such as we know men."

Katha took Tyr by the arm and led him behind a fluoroscope machine,
saying, "Stand here, please." Mason was eyeing him steadily as he
walked in front of the screen.

Tyr grinned to himself. They were in for a shock, if this machine did
what he thought it did.

The room darkened. A pale green glow came and pulsed. The plate before
him seemed to hum softly. The dark blobs of shadow that were the
Commander and Katha moved suddenly and grew still. Deadly still.

"The machine is wrong!" croaked Commander Mason.

[Illustration: _"The machine is wrong!" croaked Commander Mason._]

"It was tested yesterday. Commander. Besides, he has a heart, and a
blood stream."

"_No stomach! No lungs! No intestines!_" he breathed.

"And in place of them, strange organs that we know nothing of.
Commander, let me take him to the home planet for study! What an
experience. A mutant that--"

Light grew from the ceiling, slowly. Mason stood beside the switch,
staring at Tyr. His eyes were wild, having seen a miracle. He shuddered
and drew his cloak tighter about him.

"A mutant! And _what_ a mutant!"

Katha said reflectively, "He has organs in place of digestive tracts
that are designed for some purpose. But what purpose?"

Tyr slid away from the fluoroscope machine. He flexed his muscles.
Long enough now had he rested and played their games with them. Now he
was going into action.

"Commander, about my offer--"

"Quiet, man. Quiet! I need to think. A long time ago I knew a man who
said--but no! What I am thinking is incredible. It could not be. And
yet--and yet--"

Tyr picked up a bar of steel and balanced it lightly in his palms.
Slowly his fingers closed around it. Muscles lifted on arms and back.
The bar bent into a circle.

"My muscles may be different, too," he said. "About my offer. Is it
peace or war? All I want--"

Space Commander Mason moved his right hand swiftly downwards. It came
up from beneath his cloak with a gun. He smiled grimly, "You're big and
you're powerful as a bullock, and you're _different_. I don't want to
test your skin with a shower of light photons, but--"

Katha came up to Tyr. There was a hungry look in her eyes and about her
mouth. She whispered, "Be sensible, god of the Trylla! You are a long
time dead. Come with me. Later you can meet the Space Commander, when
his surprise has worn off."

Across the black sheen of her coiled hair he looked at the bald man and
read a pride as great as his own in the blue eyes. Dimly he knew that
Commander Mason was possessed of a will of steel and power as great as
his own, among his people. Tyr nodded.

"I will come with you."

Katha lifted her black cloak and threw it around her slender shoulders.
She cast a red-lipped smile at him and tucked her arm through his.

"Come along to my apartment," she laughed. "I want you to tell me more
about yourself."

       *       *       *       *       *

The alleys were dark and deserted. Underfoot the rounded edges of the
_calanian_ cobblestones bit into their thin sandals. The cyclopean
stone structures towered black and forbidding against the pale greyness
of the night sky. Like spiderwebs of giant structure, great space-vox
antennae were flung from tower to tower.

They walked slowly through the warm night, and others walked faster.
It was Tyr who heard the clanking of a guard's accoutrements, the
_thup_ of a holstered ray-gun smiting a trousered thigh, the harsh
rattle-clang of manacles and chains.

His wrist dragged her against him, and back with him into the shadows
of a recessed door. Many men were coming down the street. There were a
lot of chains, too.

A sliver of moonlight touched the leading man who walked stooped with
iron and the pain of open whipcuts.

"Zarman!" breathed Tyr.

His brain raced. Zarman was the governor appointed by Tyr. The _ardth_
had taken him and flogged him. It was a sign of their power over Tyr.
The people needed a sign from their god. If he were to free Zarman and
send him back to the people--

Tyr was across the cobblestones and his right fist was coming up in a
short arc. A startled guard did not have time to open his mouth before
the back of his head touched his spine and his neck cracked under that
blow. Tyr lowered him with his left hand in the small of his back, as
he snatched up the heatgun from the holster.

"Tyr!" sobbed Zarman, straightening.

The others knew him too, and in place of the blind pain and despair,
came the laugh of hope to snap their backs straight and their chins
forward.

"Beware," they whispered. "There are more of them."

Tyr moved into the shadows, saying, "Keep marching. Turn at the
corner--and wait."

The guards came on unsuspecting, but this time there were three of
them, talking and jesting. Tyr came out of the shadows with naked hands
and he hit so fast that one guard writhed on the stone street before
the others had their guns out. Another dropped with splintered ribs.
The third opened his mouth to scream. Two big hands took his throat and
vised on it.

Tyr dropped the guard and nodded to the prisoners, "Keep moving. Zarman
waits for me around the corner."

There were only two more guards. Tyr charged low. His fists pumped.

Tyr shook himself, standing alone in the alley, with the moon above
beaming down at him, bathing him in silver. The street was deserted
except for a white face above a dark cloak, and Tyr. The girl had a gun
in her hand.

"Shoot," Tyr said, tensing himself.

"Goose," whispered the girl, and bent her head to watch her hand
holster her weapon.

"Why do you not shoot?"

"Oh, I don't know. I always was a sucker for an underdog."

But there was another explanation in her dark eyes looking up at him
that made Tyr blink. He caught her elbow and walked with her around the
corner.

Zarman and the others were ranged along the wall in darkness. Zarman
came forward and looked at the girl, and whispered, "She is an _ardth_."

"Forget her. Tell me of yourself."

"The Old Ones caught us easily. Otho blabbed with his traitorous mouth.
They came and took us, though we fought."

"If I set you free, what can you do for your freedom?"

"We can fight, god Tyr. We can burrow like the mole, and battle like a
cornered rat. Try us!"

Katha went around the corner for the key to the manacles. She searched
the implementa of the guards and brought it back proudly.

The men lowered the chains and manacles into a hole they dug beneath
the cobblestones. They reset the stones and kicked the dirt into
crevices between them. One of them took the gun Tyr handed him.

Zarman made a motion to the men, and they faded out of sight.

"We go underground. Into the old tunnels dug during the war with the
_ardth_. Only the Trylla know those labyrinths."

"Good. I shall get word to you."

Katha sighed when Zarman was out of sight.

Tyr asked dryly as they walked, "Why did you not shoot me? You had your
gun out."

"That was for the guards--in case your fists were not enough."

"But you are an _ardth_!"

The girl sighed and said, "It is such a nice moon. And we are almost at
my rooms."

She laughed softly, and Tyr wondered why.


                                  III

Tyr had never seen such sybaritic luxury as was revealed when he let
the goldthread drapes rustle across the arched doorway behind him.
Strewn cushions, plump and fat, with red-and-white worked in thin
curves across their surfaces; the blue tinted walls that radiated
warmth; the richly toned murals and the hidden lights bespoke limitless
wealth. Low bookcases crammed the walls. Perfume pervaded the cool air.
It was a feminine scent, cloying, lingering.

Katha lifted a scarlet jug and poured cool white liquid into two
crystal hemispheres. One she handed to Tyr, the other she raised in her
white, red-nailed hand.

"To freedom," she laughed softly, and drank.

The white wine was rich and heady, and it warmed his throat going down.
Tyr sipped again, and again. He looked around the room with unveiled
eyes.

This was just one apartment of one girl. She ranked high in the
councils of the _ardth_, but this was a planet far from home. And all
the luxury before him! Why, one of those pillows with the red-and-white
curves would make Fay's eyes bulge in jealousy. And he was pitting
himself against a race that could give a woman this, for herself!

He grimaced. What could one man--even such as Tyr--do against such a
race? He should quit now and enjoy himself with this woman who looked
at him with those steady black eyes. He told himself all that, hating
the truth of it.

A cool hand snuggled into his palm. "Tell me about you," Katha smiled.

"There isn't anything to tell."

"You have strength and incredible speed. But what are your other
powers, Tyr? You are a mutant, a changeling. You know that. But why,
Tyr? Why? Nature doesn't try changes unless she is fitting a being for
something."

Katha was very close to him. She was perfumed and she was womanly, and
Tyr was used to neither. She was as subtle and complex as some rare
drug, where Fay was as transparent, in her childish hungers, as plate
glass.

It may have been the white wine, he thought afterward, but all he saw
now was her red mouth and the mocking amusement swimming in her black
eyes. He kissed her, holding her close in his arms.

"We're straying from the subject," she smiled up at him from his arms.

It was then that the cough sounded, from the golden drapes of the door.
Otho stood smirking in the opening, eyes leering. From head to toe he
glistened in a rainbowed silk that bellied and sank about his form with
a sensitiveness to air currents that made it seem alive.

He had a gun in his hand and it was levelled at Tyr.

"I am sorry to interrupt your--amusements--"

Tyr did not think he moved fast, but he was in front of Otho even as
the eyes of the other were commencing to widen in fright. Tyr hit the
gun upward, slamming it against Otho's sneering mouth where it made a
wide gash. The gun fell to the rug, and Tyr put out his hands and took
hold of the sleazy silk and lifted. Otho dangled a foot off the floor.

"I could break your spine," Tyr whispered.

Otho was white. He dared not speak.

"I could put the fingers of one hand around your fat neck and snap it."

Otho closed his eyes and shuddered.

Tyr dropped him and Otho fell loosely to the floor and rolled over and
came to his hands and knees. The big brown god of the Trylla loomed
vast and massive above his crouching form.

"You do not show respect to your god, Otho," Tyr grinned dangerously.
"Nor to a woman. At least, you might be courteous, if you are not
religious."

Tyr listened to the mumble that came from the man's mouth, watched him
crawl away. He turned to Katha, "That is the governor Mason gave the
Trylla."

Katha let her hip rest against the onyx tabletop as her white fingers
sought for an hydroette. The end came greenly alive at her first intake
of breath. Blowing green smoke from between her red lips she leaned
back and laughed softly.

"You know, you _are_ a god in some ways. Your very bigness, the titanic
strength and speed of you. If you swore allegiance to the _ardth_, you
would rise fast. You would be a space commander in a few years."

"Is that a promotion over being a god?"

"Tyr, listen to me. Be sensible. Use that brain of yours. You have a
brain, and a good one. It is untutored, but it sops up knowledge as a
Venusian sponge does water! I saw your eyes moving in that laboratory
of mine. You deduced the uses of the fluoroscope, the electronic
microscope. You needed only to see them in action--"

She caught her breath. The skin around her lips showed white, as her
mouth tightened. "Perhaps you could even duplicate them, given time
and the materials, just from seeing them. Could you, Tyr?"

Tyr wondered, himself. His mind held a confused jumble of plates
and wires, and remembrances of diagrams he had seen in books in the
Tower. Left alone, he rather imagined he could do what Katha hinted.
Especially if he worked in sunlight. For the sun would open the facets
of his mind, make his brain as keen and alive as his body, give it that
subconscious awareness of knowledge that awed him.

"It may be racial memories," he said slowly. "In most men those are
buried too deeply for practical use. But with me it may be different. I
do know that things do not long remain a mystery with me, once I ponder
on them."

Katha walked across the room, staring at the cushions that she kicked
idly aside. Her thin brows were puckered.

"I said you could be a Space Commander, Tyr. You could be more than
that. You could be Presider itself, if--if what I think about you is
true.

"The Trylla think the _ardth_ a heartless crew. Oh, I know. But what
the Trylla, and the other inhabitants of the planets we have taken over
do not know is this: We _ardth_ are facing a fight against extinction.
It won't come for centuries, but it is coming, as surely as you live.

"_The Glows are dying!_

"And when that happens, all our cities and all our spaceships--you
might say our lives as well--will come to a stop. If you--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Men came through the doorway, and Space Commander Mason was in front
of them. Otho poked his fat and sneering face between two _ardth_ and
laughed at Tyr. The men splayed out and Mason walked toward them, a
grim smile on his lips.

"You've left quite a trail behind you tonight, Tyr," he said. "Those
guards, then Otho. I tried to treat with you as an equal. Your word
means much with the Trylla. But I made a mistake."

Katha ran before the Commander and said swiftly, "Katha reporting on
mutant Tyr of the planet Lyallar. From observations, my conclusions are
that he is an advanced form of life, requiring no food but taking his
energy directly from another source. That his strength is phenomenal.
That his brain is superhuman. That he must be tested further. My
recommendation is--"

Mason put her aside and gestured to his men.

"--that he be shipped to the home planet for study."

Tyr shook his head and said, "No," but he never took his eyes away from
the man with the bald head.

Mason lifted his hand suddenly.

And Tyr moved.

He went fast, so fast that his arms were mere blurs lifting Mason off
his feet and flinging him. He swung up over a table and drove both
heels into a man's chest. He hit another _splat_ on the jaw just as the
man's finger tightened on the trigger and a bolt of fire went toward
the high ceiling. Now their guns were aiming and shooting yellow bolts
at him. He caught three of them on his chest.

Those yellow fires burned momentarily, before his pores could suck
their ravening power into his system. But they filled him with a
wild, savage elation. His throat keened as he charged the men by the
entrance, who knelt and fired as their eyes widened, seeing him come,
growing bigger and bigger before them.

He did not stop. He ran over the men, and left them broken on the floor.

Tyr chuckled grimly, his feet treading a rug. His big right fist held
a solargun that he had wrenched from a falling soldier. A weapon for
the Trylla! His shoulder splintered a door with two hundred pounds of
energy behind it. The lock went through the wood and Tyr was onto the
cobblestones.

The street was dark and empty. He ran with the wind, dodging around
corners and leaping along straight streets. Far behind him there came
shouts and the dull thumping of pounding feet.

The cyclopean walls of Yawarta rose before him. Here and there hung the
great nets of the fishermen, hung out to dry on stout wooden pegs. Up
then he went, his arms lifting his massive body with ease. From bastion
to ledge he went up the wall like a scurrying spider.

Now he stood on the broad top, beneath the stars. He raised an arm and
waved it at the city, and went over the other side.

He ran free, away from Yawarta.

Behind him he could hear the _phffft-phffft_ of the jet planes rising
to pursue him, leaping upwards like hounds from the racing barriers.
Tyr grinned and stretched his long legs out so that the ground sped by
eerily. They could not catch him under the stars, not with this weapon
in his hand.

Wind whistled past his ears. He headed for the silver forests he could
see in the dim distance. He would be under their shelter soon.

Beams of light showered the ground, hunting him. They slid all around,
missing him as he dodged gracefully, swerving from their pale radiance.

Soon he would be beneath those trees. Nothing on all Lyallar could
catch him then.

Tyr swung the solar gun upward, put the cold muzzle to his naked chest,
and pulled the trigger.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sunlight tinted the bluffs a pale amber, spreading a gossamer gold
across the shelving stone ledges. It made dark shadows undulate in rock
crevices, and sent tiny cascades of brilliant red and yellow from veins
of quartz. The cliffs towered high above a rolling countryside where
hummocks of grass grew in clustered greenness.

Tyr stood erect on the jagged tongue of rock, staring down at a file of
men and women walking across the hills. He was naked but for the white
cloth at his middle into which the butt of the solar gun protruded at a
rakish angle. Towering huge in the morning sun, he looked the god, by
every inch of him, that the Trylla thought him to be.

He grinned and patted the walnut handle of the weapon. That blast of
power had given him needed energy last night, when the sun was on
the other side of the planet. His follicles had drunk it in, and his
strange organs filtered it throughout his body.

All night long had he run, yet he was fresh and strong.

Now he looked across the brown valley, and saw the Trylla walking
across it, beginning the long ascent up the other side. Here and there
he recognized familiar figures. Fay was at the head of the column,
just ahead of young Texel and grim old Gaarn. Tyr scanned the blue sky.
No _ardth_-men there!

He lowered himself over the jagged edge of the bluff. His canny feet,
feeling about like sensitive fingers, found chinks in the weather-worn
rock. He went down foot by foot, yet swiftly.

When he dropped the last twenty feet to the crumbly valley bottom, the
Trylla were only a few miles from him. His straight descent had saved
him hours of travel. He could catch them now in a matter of minutes.

Fay saw him first, turning her golden head almost as if some telepathic
thought commanded her. She cried out, and the slender column wavered
and halted.

Tyr came up to her with outstretched hands and a smile on his lips, but
the smile faded when he saw her eyes.

"Why have you returned?" she asked numbly. "You made your bargains with
the _ardth_, for the girl named Katha. What else did they give you for
Lyallar, besides the girl?"

"For Lyallar? Besides the girl? Are you mad, Fay? And you others--do
you believe what she says? Fay, what--"

Gaarn said sourly, "Deny it, then. Deny that you went alone with this
woman Katha to plot our undoing. Deny that Zarman and others who
trusted you were flogged."

"I plotted no one's undoing. And as for Zarman--"

"He was flogged, wasn't he?" howled Texel, his eyes two abysses of
anguish.

"Flogged before I--"

Texel spat at him, and Tyr quivered and his hands came up. Sadly, he
let them fall again. Force would accomplish nothing. And a god must be
understanding.

"I freed Zarman and the others as they were being taken through the
streets," he said patiently. "As for Katha, she is a biologist of the
_ardth_."

"You were alone with her," Fay muttered sullenly. "Otho saw you kissing
her."

"Otho! So that is where you get your news."

"The talking trees, the silver ones," said Gaarn between toothless
lips. "They pick up subsonic messages. That was how we heard."

"And of course, you believe. It matters not that the _ardth_ appointed
Otho in place of Zarman. Take his word to mine. It was Otho that sent
the messages out, wasn't it?"

"Yes," said a woman.

"Otho wants me as a captive. So do the _ardth_. Otho hopes that you
will turn me in. There will be a reward for me. That is why he sent out
that message. He wants to turn the Trylla against me."

He talked to their eyes that reflected their feelings, fighting to
recapture their trust, "If the _ardth_ kill me, what hope is left to
you? You all say I am a god, your god. Yet you desert me at the first
lies of a renegade!"

The men shuffled their feet. Their faces were haggard, and lined with
bitterness and distrust. In some eyes, Tyr could read real hate.

"Why have you come back?" whispered Fay, staring up at a distant
mountaintop. "To turn us in? To give my back to the floggers? Am I that
valuable to the _ardth_?"

Tyr pleaded, "Should I have returned alone, if my purpose was your
capture? If that were the case, the skies would be alive with aircraft!
I knew you were on your way to the Barrow. I could have made you all
prisoners by now, if such was my intent. Reason it out. Otho tells you
lies to turn you away from the one thing that had any chance of helping
you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Like children, their faces grew hopeful, as their minds absorbed his
words. Fay was biting her lip. From under her yellow lashes, her brown
eyes studied him.

"But you kissed this Katha, didn't you? You kissed an _ardth_-woman!
The god of the Trylla would never do that."

Tyr could see her illogical reasoning was swaying the others. They were
hesitant, reproachful.

He said defiantly, "I kissed her, because she was a woman, and lovely.
I--"

Fay turned her back. The others looked from the girl to Tyr and back at
the girl again.

"I am no traitor, because of that kiss. I--"

They were not listening, but following Fay who was walking swiftly
away, and toward the hills in the purple distance. His fingers closed
on empty bitterness as he stood there alone, miserable. His people ...
following a girl toward destruction.

Sorrow gnawed in his heart. This was the fate of a god, then, that his
children should misunderstand him, perhaps even that they should hate
him. Still, he did not blame them. They were so alone, so helpless, and
so afraid.

Watching them move away, Tyr knew they needed him more than ever. They
were leaving the only one who stood any chance of helping them. Without
him, the Trylla were like toys before the hard, sure hands of the
_ardth_.

He touched the handle of the solar gun and let his fingers trail away.

He would have to find the Barrow alone, now.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two days later, Tyr parted the green fronds of a mountain bush and
looked at the gleaming whiteness of the Barrow. It was a low rounded
dome, lying across the hard whitish rocks of a strange mountain peak.
From where he stood, he could make out arches receding back in under
the dome, many of them. The arches were so many that each looked like a
reflection of the others.

The Barrow, he thought with dull triumph. It was camouflaged perfectly.
That roundness gave no glint to a watcher in the sky. Its lowness cast
no shadow. Its whiteness blended with the dazzling brilliance of the
white mountain rocks. No wonder it had stood years without detection.
Even looking for it as he was, Tyr almost missed it. Only the arches,
seen at a certain angle, betrayed its existence.

He loped toward it, breaking into the open. Only when he was near the
arches did he see the woman on the ground to one side, kneeling. Before
her a man lay on his back.

Tyr went forward on the tips of his toes, as silent as a breeze moving
across rock.

The girl knelt beside the man, was moving her hands over him swiftly,
competently. Then she leaned back on her haunches and shook her dark
head. The black blouse and white slacks looked familiar. When he saw
her face as she raised it, he knew.

"Katha," he said.

The girl whirled, reaching for a gun at her hip. But when she saw him
fully she gave a low cry and scrambled to her feet. "Tyr, Tyr! Oh, I'm
so glad I've found you!" And was running to him.

He tried to be curt, but it was useless. There was too much joy shining
out of those black eyes, too much laughter and delight. And she was so
feminine! He put out his hands and held her arms, making her stay a
little away from him. Tyr wondered if she heard the wild pounding of
his heart.

"Why?" he asked. "Why are you here? Why did you come searching for me?"

Laughter was like musical hoarseness in her throat. With head flung
back so that she could hold him with her eyes, she said, "Because Space
Commander Mason ordered that you be shot on sight. Because you are a
doomed man. And because--I think you may yet save the Trylla."

"You are _ardth_!"

"It makes no difference. What are you, for that matter?"

"I--I don't know."

He did not know. Always that uncertainty tugged at the core of him.
Unknowingness within him, like an emptiness. Who are you, Tyr? What are
you? And mad laughter answered, "You do not know. You will never know
what you are. A god? Ho! Not you, not Tyr."

She saw the blankness in his eyes, and the misery. Her voice was soft,
tender. "Tyr, can't you see? You are--Tyr."

He shook his head, heart dull within his chest.

She cried between a laugh and a sob, "But you are the first, Tyr,
the first of your kind! I can tell you that. You are a biochemical
newcomer."

"What does that mean?"

"I don't know. No one knows. _You_ have to prove it to yourself first.
_You_ have to learn about you, and then others will know. Who can best
understand a new thing but the thing itself! Explore yourself, Tyr--and
know!"

Katha hooked a finger in the black braid of her belt and made traceries
in the sand with the toe of her sandal. "I had to come and find you.
I could not let you die. Besides, there is something in what you do.
If the Trylla could be made friendly to the _ardth_ they would help
us. Perhaps they could find the way to keep the Glows from dying. The
_ardth_ need help. You might be the agent to bring _ardth_ and Trylla
together."

From the depths of his bitterness, Tyr laughed harshly.

"I am but one against the _ardth_. I have no allies. Even the Trylla
turn their faces from me. The only thing that keeps me going is the
thought that a god must protect his people. Even if they hate him."

"Then think of the rewards that the Trylla may reap, if you unite them
with the _ardth_ in friendship. The _ardth_ are not only conquerors,
but colonizers as well. In the far-flung span of cities that spread
from the home planets fanwise beyond even Fornax, there are many
marvels.

"You have never been to Zafega on Fomalhaut-2. You have not beheld the
creata-screens, where your dreams become reality, where the deeps of
the subconscious are caught in graphs and translated into pictures.
That is incredible beauty, and horror in one! No one is ever the same,
having beheld his dreams in a waking moment.

"Then there are the historays that recapture the past, making a living,
breathing thing of it. You could see the history of all Lyallar, Tyr,
from its primordial beginnings until the--"

Tyr whispered roughly, "That sight would make me realize even more
bitterly what it means to be a Tryllan--and alive--these days."

Katha turned her back to him, looking across the rock and sand to a
distant fringe of silver trees. Tyr bit his lip, staring at her shapely
shoulders. Fool! To alienate the one person on all the planet who cared
whether--

An old face lying on the ground, his eyes saw. Gaunt brown cheeks, and
sparse grey hair on a round skull. Harl. The ancient one with a brain
filled with the magic of war and the knowledge of sciences lost to all
the Trylla, other than himself. Harl was dead.


                                  IV

Katha killed him. That was why she was here. She cared not a fig for
his chances of freeing the Trylla. She was a spy. And he believed her
talk of screens and luxuries and the joys of joining the _ardth_!

His hand vised at her wrist and twisted her around to face him. Her
black eyes went wide, frightened at the mad rage in his face. Under the
grip of that hand, her knees dug into the sand.

"You murdered him. You--"

"No! Oh, no, Tyr! His heart stopped from excitement. He--he thought the
_ardth_ had found the Barrow. It _is_ the Barrow, isn't it?"

"Yes," he muttered numbly, looking away from her toward the receding,
confusing arches.

Accuse her again, Tyr. Do not let those big black eyes fool you. She
is a traitress, is she? She is a spy, instead. Accuse the one thing on
all Lyallar that believes in you. Smash her belief. Kill her with your
hands. Stand alone, as always you have done.

"No!" he moaned, swaying on big legs, widespread.

The woman knelt, looking up at him.

His eyes closed as thoughts rocketed across his brain. She killed Harl.
_She wears no gun, his body bears no mark of violence!_ She is a spy
for Mason, and will betray you. _She has come alone to you!_ Kill her,
and be safe. Trust not in your strength to fight what may come.

He put out his big hands and caught her shoulders. He lifted her up and
held her against him. He rained kisses on her soft mouth.

She stirred after a while, gently.

She whispered, her black head nestled to his chest, "You love me, Tyr?"

"Yes."

"You came to the Barrow, Tyr. Let us do what you would have done. Rumor
has it that there are weapons inside."

"Harl was the only one who knew their use."

She rubbed her arms with her palms, loving the bruise where his hands
had dwelt. She chided, "Fie, darling. A god can understand any weapon."
And when he glanced sharply to seek mockery in her eyes, she said
simply, "I mean it. You can understand them, if you will. Your mind is
different. Try it!"

As they went beneath the myriad arches, their feet stepping loudly on
the marble flooring in the stillness, Tyr said, "If I cannot use these
weapons the cause of the Trylla is forever lost."

A labyrinth of strange things and objects, set on shelf and counter,
under glass and on metal. Mazes of plasticine and steel, glittering and
glimmering, shadowing cones and tridents and metal circlets. And none
of it was even remotely understandable to the brown giant who stood and
stared.

Katha slipped a hand into his and said, "You can do it, Tyr. Yes, you
can!"

He shook his head, but he went and stood before the machines. With
narrowed eyes, he studied curving generators and domed turbines.
Slowly, almost reluctantly, he began to understand them. If only--

A beam of yellow sunlight swam through a glassine vent in the wall,
quivering, moving. It touched Tyr, laving his brown face and dark hair
in its radiance. The sunlight was hot and soothing. Tyr smiled faintly,
knowing that the light was opening the secret facets of his brain,
feeding energy to them, making his mind work whether he wanted it to or
not.

He was understanding these silent machines, now.

He touched a button, and watched an engine throb and hum, coming to
life. Where the blue discs were was its outlet. They turned red, and
glowed. When they went white, a blast of power would splay out, and he
did not want that to happen, yet. He shut the power off.

Katha walked with him. "You know?" she asked softly.

"I know."

"There is a kitchenette off to one side," she said. "I am going to
prepare food for myself. Then tell me your plans!"

When she left him, Tyr turned back to the metal giants, touching levers
and rods. He lost himself in their intricacies as a boy does with new
and complicated toys.

He did not hear Katha cry out from the next chamber. He did not hear
the footsteps. He did not see the girl who came with Gaarn and Texel
to stand in the doorway, a solar gun in her white hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

A ball of flame exploded amid the coils and antennae of a big machine.
Another fell onto a huge dynamo. Still another whistled shrilly as it
clove a path through cones and hoops.

Tyr whirled, but it was too late. Fay was firing rapidly, as fast as
she could depress the stud. The yellow blasts ate and drank their way
through the machines until every one lay smashed and wrecked.

Tyr laughed bitterly.

"Destroy your every chance," he said. "Your freedom lies on the floor,
amid those twisted metal things."

Fay lifted the gun and aimed it at him. She said coldly, "The _ardth_
shall never receive our weapons, Tyr. I destroyed them before you could
bring the _ardth_ to them."

"I would never bring the _ardth_! What mad poison eats in your brains,
you Trylla? Without weapons, what may I do?"

"The Old Ones shall never get them!"

"The Old Ones do not need these things. They have better ones. A
hundred years ago they beat men who used these weapons. In that time
they have new weapons, better weapons! What would the _ardth_ want with
things like these?"

There was doubt in the eyes of some, but Fay lifted her gun. Tyr walked
toward her, seeing the red hate in her eyes. Her finger touched the
stud and balls of yellow fire leaped for him, splashed across his chest.

He went on, unstoppable. The energy from the yellow balls poured into
him. Muscles rippled on his arms as he reached out and took the gun
away from her.

With white hand pressed to her writhing mouth, Fay stared at him in
dumb awe. Tyr wrapped his fingers around the gun. The metal crumpled in
his hand. When he opened his hand the remnants bounced on the floor.

Tyr put a hand to Fay's shoulder and pushed her aside. Gaarn and young
Texel watched him with fascinated, frightened eyes. He lunged into the
chamber where Katha had cried out.

"Katha!" he called.

She lay on a long white table, and there were strong steel straps
holding her. Her clothing was somewhat torn. Her dark eyes met his from
the corners as her red mouth smiled a little.

[Illustration: _He lunged into the chamber where Katha lay. Her dark
eyes met his._]

"I tried to warn you. The Trylla do not like the _ardth_. They wanted
me alive to learn secrets from me." She made a grimace. "I don't know
whether I could have stood up to torture."

"There's no need of it, now," he grunted, putting his hands under the
straps and bursting them. He lifted her and held her on his chest.

"I am no longer god of the Trylla," he rasped bitterly, looking down at
her. "I am hated by them. Now I am--nothing!"

She was very round and soft on his ribs. Tyr tightened his arm,
watching her mouth. Katha made a face and mocked him.

"Man or god--you hurt!"

He eased his arms a little, still holding her tightly. He went down the
corridor of the arches as Fay and the others watched from the shadows.
His footfalls were soft, but deadly. It was as though his feet intoned
a _danse macabre_ for the Tryllan race.

Tyr carried the girl to her jet plane that had been hidden among the
rocks. He lifted her into it and swung up, both hands on the smooth
plasticine handles. The door clicked behind him.

Katha dropped into a red leather seat before an intricate
control-board. Her white fingers touched pins. The ship rumbled and
shuddered. Slowly it trundled forward, gathering momentum. From the
port window, Tyr watched the white dome of the Barrow falling away
below. He turned his eyes to the front, seeing her lift the plane over
a fringe of _hibithus_-trees to arrow into the cloudless sky.

"Katha, I am homeless."

Homeless and a wanderer, without a people. The Trylla had been his
people, if a god ever had people. Now they had turned against him,
broken with him, even tried to kill him. There was bitterness on his
tongue and in his heart. A bitterness that burned and galled.

From the depths of his anguish, he cried, "I want to be a part of
something, Katha! I am neither Tryllan nor _ardth_. What am I?"

The woman caught his hand and pressed it to her lips. She whispered
softly, "To me you are always a god, Tyr. I love you. You love me."

"I have you. Yes, that makes up for everything else."

He sighed, "But I keep telling myself that I have failed. That I have
not done all I could to free the Trylla."

"What of the tower, Tyr? You said it had strange things in it. Perhaps
it is a laboratory, of sorts. I might make tests there, of you, seek
to know your purposes, your abilities."

"Yes, the tower. I'd forgotten that. It could be a home to us. An
_ardth_-woman and a--an unknown!"

"I am _ardth_ no longer. I gave that up when I came after you. I knew
what I was doing."

He knelt and caught her to him, saying, "There is no place for either
of us, except with the other. Two wanderers."

"Two wanderers," she sighed. "With a purpose. A mad, insane belief in
themselves. To fight even when there is no chance of victory!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The tower stood gaunt and lonely, rising up into a blue sky. Baked dirt
powdered into clouds under their feet as they walked toward it. The
tower was strong and thickly built, and it towered above the flat earth
in its loneliness. In that respect, it was a little like Tyr himself,
Katha thought. She studied the flat buttresses and arched windows.

"An _ardth_-man built that," she said.

"If he did, he made it a laboratory and home at the same time."

Katha furrowed her thin black brows. "But what _ardth_ ever built such
a tower on Lyallar?" she wondered.

Tyr pushed open the big wooden door. The round room was walled with
dials and panels, cool and dim. It gave off a faint and musky smell. A
circular table was covered with vials and belljars and retorts. Shelves
lined the walls, and bottles lined the shelves. At the far side of the
room, a metal stairway twisted its way to the upper floors.

Katha wandered around, delight shining in her eyes. She lifted vials
and smelled at chemicals. Laughter gurgled in her throat.

"But this is marvelous. It's almost as complete as my own lab. Now who
built this place, Tyr? Can you tell me?"

He showed her a big book bound in tooled leather.

"William Rohrig!" she cried at sight of the golden letters stamped into
the cover. "Why--why, he was an _ardth_ genius! We often wondered what
became of him! He was to travel to Antares, to study life conditions on
one of its outer planets. Commander Mason would be delighted--"

She broke off, glancing sideways at Tyr.

He said, "If it were not for me, you could go back. You could go
anyhow. I--"

Her white palm covered his mouth. "Don't say it, Tyr. We'll see this
through, you and I."

"If there were only some way in which I could convince the _ardth_ that
they and the Trylla could live in peace! The Trylla mistrust me and the
_ardth_ hate me, for I threaten their power. Katha, Katha! There is no
answer."

"There is always an answer to a problem. The only trouble is, it takes
a long time to see it."

While Tyr worked at the table, making tests and experiments under
Katha's guidance, to test the powers of his mind, Katha made the tower
her own. Sunlight bathed Tyr through an open window. Above him he
heard her footsteps going to and fro, heard her lifting things, and
the squeals of delight when she unearthed notebooks that had once been
Rohrig's.

They spent their days in work and laughter. Katha made many tests on
him, saying, "You are a biological miracle, darling. I don't know much
about miracles, so I have to learn, slowly and gropingly."

       *       *       *       *       *

But she never completed her findings. For one day she discovered,
tucked into a corner of the big desk on the second floor, a dusty old
diary. For three hours she sat entranced with it, never stirring, until
Tyr came hunting her, anxious over her silence. He found her with tears
in her eyes, her white teeth nibbling at her full lower lip.

She looked up at his entrance whispering, "Do you know your name, Tyr?
Your full name?"

"Tyr. A ring round my neck bore it."

"Those were only your initials. Your real name is Theodore Young
Rohrig. Your father was William Rohrig. You are _ardth_, Tyr!"

He stared at her. She clapped her hands, black eyes glowing.

"He knew about you. Oh, he was brilliant, Tyr--or Ted! He knew your
function. He called you a mutant, darling. No stomach, no lungs, no
need for water. The future man! I can see, now that my eyes have been
opened. It is Nature, striving all the time for perfection, equipping
her products with the necessities to get along in their environments!
In you she is fitting man for space travel, darling!

"Out there among the stars, without lungs and with no need for food
or water, you could strip a ship down and really travel. Light-years
wouldn't mean a thing to you. Just a battery of sun-lamps to feed you.
You wouldn't age hardly at all, for you derive your heat from outside
sources, instead of generating it in your tissues, as normal men do!
Your organs merely transmit the heat and energy into your muscles and
brain. There is no food to be digested and churned into energy, to be
broken into heat-energy in the cells. Your energy comes from outside!"

"You make it sound important."

"It _is_ important! I feel I don't understand _how_ important you
really are."

Grimly he said, "Now if only we could convince the _ardth_ and the
Trylla of that!"

Katha caught his arm, saying fiercely, "Tyr--Ted--oh, I'll call you
Tyr! You can't give up. You must fight. The _ardth_ are fighters, Tyr.
Your father was a fighter. He came here with his wife because he had
space leprosy! That's right. And his wife came with him. You were born
on Lyallar--far, so far from your home planet. He died a long time ago,
did William Rohrig, but his fighter's heart didn't die."

A red fingernail stabbed into the flesh of his chest. "That heart is in
you, Tyr. It wants to fight. Maybe it doesn't know how, but you are sad
only for that reason. You aren't fighting!"

Tyr whispered hoarsely, "Tell me how, Katha. How shall I fight?"

"How do you want to fight? What does your heart and your brain tell
you?"

He stood and let the sunlight hit his forehead. It grew hotter and
hotter as he stood there, and inside his skull he felt something
stirring, and knew it for his opening brain. _Fight them where they are
most vulnerable, Tyr. Hit them at their core!_ The inner voice that was
his thought whispered again, _Destroy the Glow!_

"I must destroy the Glow," he said to her.

Katha shuddered, whispered in horror, "You cannot! You would die from
it long before you ever came to it. The Glow is terrible, awesome,
Tyr!"

The sunlight made a pattern on his chest as he turned. "Nevertheless,
that is what I must do."

The woman bowed her head and took his hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city of Mart sprawled like a lazing slug upon the prairie. Aircraft
sped across its walls, winging into illimitable distances. The deep
hum of tradesmen's voices as they called their wares mingled with
the smooth roll of gyrocars, rising to form the soul of the great
metropolis. Armed guards clanged along the tops of the pyramidal walls.

A tall man clad like a mountain shepherd, in wool cloak and hood,
stalked beside a woman who went with downbent head, clinging to his
arm. Once in a while the woman whispered to him, and the man made a
turn into a different street.

They had dust on their cloaks and dust on their feet, those two.
Occasionally the woman stumbled, for she was a born actress. Yet an
airplane lay less than three miles from the city walls, hidden by
boughs torn from _hibithus_-trees.

"We are almost at the Commune," whispered the woman.

"There are no people here," the man said.

"Your Trylla approach not near to the building that houses the Glow.
They fear it too much."

They went faster, lengthening their steps. Opposite a tall white
building that had _ardth_ lettering graven into its stone, they slowed
and the woman spoke again.

"That is where the Glow is, hidden deep in the bowels of earth beneath
the Citadel. Always are there guards there. They must be overcome."

The man threw back the cloak, revealed big chest and long arms naked
under it. Head flung back, he studied the building eagerly.

"They will be overcome!"

The cloak fell to the flagging and the golden giant was gone in long
strides that carried him to the doors of the Citadel and within them.
The woman stood watching, then bent and lifted his fallen cloak, threw
it over her arm, and followed.

Inside the darkness of the Citadel, Tyr went on bare feet, with
uncanny silence. A guard came toward him, and he darted into the
shadows. When the guard was five paces away, Tyr struck.

He lowered the guard, and went on. Voices came from ahead of him.

"This Tyr will know how strong are the _ardth_ when he learns what has
befallen Zarman!"

"Aye! I wonder what has become of him? Is he dead?"

"Not he. He bides his time. He hopes for a rising of the Trylla!"

"With Zarman and his crew to be executed today, what chance have the
Trylla?"

Tyr was turned to stone. His heart hammered inside his chest. Zarman
to die! But how had the _ardth_ taken him? Once captured, he would be
twice as wary! His hands lifted in the shadows toward the guards, but
he held them still.

Tyr swung about and went on.

He did not know of the men outside in the street who halted suddenly
and looked at Katha excitedly. Their footfalls as they ran across the
street toward her went unheard by him as he raced along the corridors
of the Citadel.

Katha had no chance to scream. A wrist jammed her throat and an _ardth_
voice whispered, "Traitress!"

Tyr ran on.

A heavy throb pounded through the steel corridors, and along the
polished runways, and into the panelled rooms of the Citadel. Deep
down, seemingly in the guts of the planet, came the monotonous,
frightening beat and thunder of the Glow, pulsing in a powerful rhythm.
Not many men stayed long in this building, and the guards were changed
every few hours. No one had run into it with such gladness as did Tyr,
ever.

His feet barely touched the floor as he ran. He flexed his muscles,
testing his strength. He was fit and ready from a week of lying in
blazing sunlight, from basking under sun-lamps arranged by Katha to aid
her in her tests.

A guard saw him and yanked at a gun, but Tyr took his face in the palm
of his hand and banged his head against the polished steel wall, and
left him twitching but alive. Tyr ran swiftly now, heading down and
always downward along the ramps, deeper into the earth.

The farther he went, the more sullen grew the throb and roar. It
pounded at the temples, shook the walls, surging all around.

On a lintel before a metal elevator was inscribed an _ardth_ word. Tyr
knew it to be the warning of the Glow. But he put out his hand and
opened the elevator door and stepped within. He threw the switch.

There was a falling sensation for a moment, but that passed as Tyr
walked around his little cell, working his arms and legs. He was tense
and excited, waiting, waiting. This was to be the test. Katha said if
he lived through it, that it would be the most marvelous sensation of
his entire life. That it would, in some alchemic way, transmute him.

It was warm now. The car was falling faster and faster. Tyr wondered
why the _ardth_ bothered to have a car at all. If the Glow was all
rumor had it to be, the _ardth_ would have to build a new car every
time this journey was taken. But the ritual of the thing! The _ardth_
must maintain their superstitious hold on the Trylla.

He smiled. The _ardth_! They were his race, a people that called a
planet called Earth their home. It sounded so like the Tryllan word
_ardth_, meaning old, that the Trylla had always called them that. Even
the Earthmen accepted the term.

Hot was the car, like some monstrous bubble of fiery air. The light,
yellow and brilliant and blinding, came seeping in through cracks in
the jointures of the door.

The metal of the car was turning red, deepening to a cherry rose,
fading to a cold blue, dawning to a pale white....

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Auditorium of Ancestors, Space Commander Mason sat languidly on
the highbacked ivory throne under an arched canopy. Sprayed fanwise
before him were gorgeously uniformed _ardth_ officers, stiff-backed as
they faced the girl with black hair and black eyes.

Fifteen feet from the throne, Katha stood with head flung back, smiling
at Commander Mason. "Your men are efficient, Space Commander," she
said. "They found me on the street."

"There is no one as lovely as Katha among the _ardth_," smiled Mason.
"There is no one as treacherous, either."

"I fled to Tyr because I felt him to be of help to us. He is--and will
be a help. He has gone now to destroy the Glow."

Mason was out of his seat in one tremendous explosion of speed. His
hands caught her arms.

"Destroy the Glow? Are you mad? Is he? Nothing can destroy the Glow!
What secret does he know?"

"No secret, other than himself. He is Tyr."

Mason clenched a fist, saying, "You said he could help us. It is no
help to destroy the Glow!"

"He cannot destroy it. He will learn that!"

"I think he will, too. It will destroy him, long before he reaches it.
But I have spoken enough with you. You must die for actions performed
detrimental to the _ardth_ welfare."

Space Commander Mason clapped his hands. Guards entered a doorway,
and behind them came ragged men with flogged backs, bleeding, wearing
manacles. Katha started toward them, before Mason caught her.

She called, "Which of you is Zarman?"

A big man lifted a face swollen with beatings. His eyes were sullen as
he looked across the room, at a group of Trylla clad in rainbowed silk
garments. Otho smirked beside Fay, who wore a gigantic emerald necklace
on her white throat. Her hand fingered it lovingly. On her hand gleamed
a golden ring with the letters TYR engraven on it.

"She bears the ring of Tyr," rasped Zarman. "She came to us with a
lying message and we believed her. She led us to--the _ardth_!"

Fay tossed her blonde curls indifferently, and glanced down at the
necklace that once had belonged to Queen Yatha-sath.

Commander Mason cleared his throat.

"Take them all, including Katha, to the Square of Dying. We will
witness their hanging together."

       *       *       *       *       *

Tyr laughed aloud and stretched, feeling a mad inferno of fire bathing
him. His pores were opening, one by one, accepting that insane
incandescence with a strange and alien hunger. A man would have died in
madness long ago, but Tyr did not die.

He watched the metal of the car weep itself into globous molten
droplets of metal that bulged and oozed and bubbled. A cable parted,
and the car plunged free.

There was brightness here, all around him as he watched the car flare
in riotous colors. The irridescent hues of red and blue and white
flashed for a quivering instant, then puffed into mist that was like a
bath of minute motes of color.

Tyr reached for an outcropping of volcanic rock, and clung to it. He
lifted himself, and stood on a stone ledge.

Beneath him, suspended in a mighty chasm, was the Glow.

_The Glow was a tiny sun!_

It hung in an endless abyss. It pulsed and throbbed and quivered, and
shot streamers of fire upwards and around it. From its moving core,
the leaping tongues shot out, expending its energy and, by its own
inconceivable heat, restoring the elements to begin the process all
over again.

Many ages ago, the Earthmen discovered solar energy. When deVries
invented the multilinear umbra-cell, he discovered that it would hold
hordes of hydrogen atoms that could be heated to a point that made them
an atomic sun. From these bits of power scientists built small suns of
their own, and hung them in deep abysses. From their everlasting power
they sapped the energy needed to drive their machines and light their
homes. They fed the solar power through tentacles of spun carborungsten
into generators and dynamos.

The Earthmen took these suns with them across the voids, to planets
like Lyallar, and strung them in their deepest chasms. And where went
the suns, they were objects of dread and awe.

This one was no object of dread to Tyr.

Standing on the lip of rock, he laughed and raised his arms, and felt
that titanic heat and energy flow directly into him. Tyr had no need
for carborungsten cables to power the dynamo of his body. The follicles
of his skin opened their hungry mouths and sucked that energy into him.

Tyr was changing, standing there.

He was becoming energy itself, every pore and organ of him filling to
capacity with the heat and light of that glowing orb. He was charged to
bursting.

Tyr turned to the jagged stone wall, and began to climb.

       *       *       *       *       *

A gallows stood in the Square of Dying, lifting its black arms toward
a blue sky. From the crosspiece hung plasticine nooses, like silvery
webs. Men and one woman stood below those hoops of transparent plastic,
on a raised platform.

Space Commander Mason said to Katha, "You realize now that your man-god
Tyr is nothing compared to the _ardth_?"

"Tyr is the only hope the _ardth_ have," she whispered. "I have told
you his father was William Rohrig."

"A tale calculated to amaze me. I do not believe you."

"I told you how his body is different, that it can sop up solar energy
and translate it into terms of human energy without wear or tear on his
system. That he is future man, man in a body fitted to venture out in
space, far beyond where we have gone."

"I still do not believe."

A man came and looped the noose around the woman's neck. She shook her
head when he would have covered it with a purple mask.

"I tell you now, Commander Mason, that the only one who can renew the
Glows is Tyr. Our electro-astrogines have informed us that the elements
needed to make new Glows exists only on the planets close to the great
suns. Every expedition we sent to those planets perished of heat before
they reached them.

"One man could make such a trip--Tyr."

Mason grinned at her. "You're mad, Katha. Executioner, throw the bolt."
The executioner put his hand on the lever and swung it over.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tyr climbed the black rock swiftly. Hands and feet felt for and found
niches in the rough surface. Up and up he went. Once he stood on a
narrow ledge and craned his neck, staring at the blackness where the
carborungsten cables gaped their dark orifices. He was going up there,
to those cables, and rip them out. He would smash the dynamos, and
nothing could stop him.

Over the lip of a metal cable-mouth he went, and his hands showed
bright in the darkness as he seized the wires and pulled, ripping them
from welded sockets. He tore and broke with his glowing hands, passing
them under and over the cables, and tearing.

As he destroyed, he walked. With his fists he battered against a wall
of metal and splintered it. He stepped through and walked toward the
dynamos that were lazily rotating. Some of them already had come to a
halt.

Tyr touched the engines with his hands and summoned the energies of
his body. The metal cracked under the strain of that superhuman power.
Casings split and bearings crumpled.

Tyr walked on.

       *       *       *       *       *

The executioner threw the lever, and nothing happened. Katha laughed
softly, and there was a light in her dark eyes that made Space
Commander yearn.

She whispered, "He has won!"

Mason roared, "Throw the auxiliary engines over!"

But the auxiliary engines were dead, too. Now the _ardth_-men murmured
and whispered among themselves, for the unnatural quiet of the Citadel
was hammering their eardrums.

Footsteps sounded on the flagging.

Something tall and something bright was crossing the Street of Space
and entering the Square. It was shaped like a man, but its gleaming
yellowness was so brilliant that it hurt the eyes to see it.

"Tyr!" screamed Katha.

Space Commander Mason shuddered and put a trembling hand across his
eyes. He looked smaller, frail in his dark cloak, standing before the
giant who was coming toward him. His officers fell away from him as Tyr
came on. To one side a girl with an emerald necklace dropped and lay in
a huddled heap on the ground.

From the throats of the manacled Tryllans a roar went up.

"Our god has come for vengeance!"

"Yield, you _ardth_! Yield to Tyr!"

"See how he shines in his glory!"

Twenty feet from Mason, Tyr came to a stop, for fear that the heat his
body emanated would blast the man.

"Free Katha and Zarman and the others," the yellow giant said.

Mason nodded.

"Stay away from me," he warned Katha, seeing her leaping from the dais
of the gallows. "I am still overcharged with energy. It will fade in a
little while. Wait."

Tyr looked at Mason.

"Zarman will be governor of Lyallar. Otho must die. Fay--Fay will be
banished for her treachery. Let her keep the emeralds. She will die if
we take them from her. The Trylla will live in peace and friendship
with the Earth peoples. It is my order."

Zarman came forward and held out his hand to Space Commander Mason who
took it thoughtfully. The man with the bald head swung on Tyr.

"Then it is true what Katha said? You _can_ go near a sun? It makes
your body like--that?"

"It fills it with heat and light. And heat and light are energy. My
body is energy, right now. Later, that peak of pure energy will fade.
It will resume its normal look. But potentially, it is always as you
see it now ... needing only a sun to make it so."

Katha looked at Mason, across the cobblestones of the square.

She said, "I told you Tyr is the one to renew the Glows. He would not
die on a planet near enough to the sun for the elements we need."

"I will do that," agreed Tyr. "I am no longer god of the Trylla. I
brought them their freedom. I have discharged the responsibility they
put about my shoulders when they made me their god.

"My father was _ardth_. I, too, am _ardth_. If I can save the _ardth_,
I shall."

He turned toward Commander Mason and said. "And, being an _ardth_, I am
under your orders, sir."

Mason drew a deep breath, took off his hat and ran his hand over his
bald head. His face wrinkled with amazement, changing to a shy smile.

"My orders, Tyr? Hmm. The first thing you ought to do is--cool off.
Then, when you're able to do it safely, take this woman Katha into your
arms and kiss her for her belief in you! After that--you might consider
mating with her. Your children will carry a torch, Tyr. To the true
ends of the world."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Man the Sun-Gods Made, by Gardner F. Fox

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN THE SUN-GODS MADE ***

***** This file should be named 63824.txt or 63824.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/2/63824/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
