The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tad Coon's Tricks, by John Breck

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Tad Coon's Tricks

Author: John Breck

Illustrator: William T. Andrews

Release Date: January 05, 2021 [eBook #64216]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Roger Frank

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAD COON'S TRICKS ***


                           TAD COON’S TRICKS


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       Told at Twilight Stories
                             By JOHN BRECK

                     MOSTLY ABOUT NIBBLE THE BUNNY
                    NIBBLE RABBIT MAKES MORE FRIENDS
                     THE SINS OF SILVERTIP THE FOX
                           TAD COON’S TRICKS
                        THE WAVY TAILED WARRIOR
                       TAD COON’S GREAT ADVENTURE
                          THE BAD LITTLE OWLS
                       THE JAY BIRD WHO WENT TAME

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Illustration: Tad sent a big rock rushing down on top of Grandpop
Snapping Turtle.]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                       Told at Twilight Stories

                           Tad Coon’s Tricks

                                  by
                               John Breck

                            Illustrated by
                           William T. Andrews

                        Garden City    New York
                       Doubleday, Page &amp; Company

                                 1923

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY
                       DOUBLEDAY, PAGE &amp; COMPANY

                ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF
                  TRANSLATION INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES,
                       INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

             COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY THE ASSOCIATED NEWSPAPERS

                     PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
                                   AT
               THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y

                             First Edition

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

  I. Songs of the Hunt
  II. Tad Coon’s Tricks and His Troubles
  III. Grandpop’s Bite that Never Let Go
  IV. Tad’s Tricks Come Home to Roost
  V. The Time Tad Coon Was Trickier Than He Knew
  VI. Tad Makes a Compact with Watch and Tommy Peele
  VII. Black Crime in the Hen House
  VIII. How Nibble Turned Detective
  IX. Stripes Skunk Learns How to Behave
  X. Stripes Skunk Begins to be Good
  XI. Stripes Continues His Good Works
  XII. Doctor Muskrat Tells Why Skunks Are So
  XIII. In Defense of a Lady


------------------------------------------------------------------------

ILLUSTRATIONS

  Tad sent a big rock rushing down
  Snap! went Grandpop Snapping Turtle’s mouth on Tad Coon’s playful tail
  Tad Coon hits Trailer on the head with a hornet’s nest
  Tad Coon needs Doctor Muskrat
  At the edge of Doctor Muskrat’s Pond
  The Bad Little Owl comes flipping by
  Nibble accuses Stripes of stealing
  Bob White was caught in Tommy Peele’s snare


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                           TAD COON’S TRICKS


                               CHAPTER I
                           SONGS OF THE HUNT

You’d have thought every wing and paw in the Woods and Fields (except
the Bad Little Owls, of course) would have been glad to know that
Silvertip the Fox was caught. ’Specially Nibble Rabbit, who started the
hunt, and wise old Doctor Muskrat, who planned it, and Tommy Peele’s
good dog, Watch, and Trailer the Hound, who were still barking on his
trail way out in the middle of the Deep Woods. For Silvertip was just as
clever as he was wicked; the very last thing he’d done was to fool those
two dogs again.

I s’pose old Grandpop Snapping Turtle, who did the catching was--glad, I
mean. But Doctor Muskrat just looked very, very sober, and Nibble felt
the shivers run from the puff on his tufty tail to the tips of his
tickly whiskers whenever he thought about it. They didn’t have a word to
say while they waited for the two hunters to come back to the
meeting-place by the flat stone at the edge of the Pond.

But they thought of course the dogs would bark the good news so loud
that Tommy could hear it way down the road at the schoolhouse. Instead,
Trailer just gasped, “How awful!” in a very awed voice. And Watch looked
as if somebody’d rubbed him the wrong way.

“Awful!” repeated Trailer. “Poor Silvertip! Think of his being caught by
a stupid old mud-grubber like that!” He drooped his tail and ears.

“Why, that’s just the way I felt about it!” Nibble exclaimed. “But I
never dreamed you would. I thought you hated him.”

“Hate him!” said both dogs at once. “Why, he was the smartest Beast we
ever chased. We hadn’t any reason to hate him.”

That certainly made Nibble open his eyes pretty wide. “Then why did you
try to kill him?” he demanded. “Was it because you’re hungry?” He was
glad to know that the Pickery Things were close behind him when he asked
that.

Trailer laughed. “I’m always hungry.” But his tail went up when he said
it, so Nibble didn’t run. “But that isn’t why I hunt. You have to know a
beast to hate him. I’ve killed plenty of beasts I never saw before I
found their trail. Lots that I don’t eat, either.”

“I couldn’t do that!” Nibble gasped and Doctor Muskrat nodded.

“Of course not,” said Trailer, quite proudly, too. “But that’s what I
was made for. My mother taught me to use my nose before my eyes were
open and to sing the trailing song as soon as I could talk above a
whimper.”

“Sing it,” begged the woodsfolk. “Please.”

Trailer raised his head and bayed with an open throat:

    “Drop your nose on the odorous trail,
    For the warmest footprint soon grows stale.
        Tow-row-row!
    Leap the fences, plough through the mire,
    At a steady gallop that’s slow to tire,
    Follow the game of the hounds’ desire.
    Raise your eyes--There he flies!
    Hail!
    Mark the flick of his fleeting tail!
        Tow-row-row!”

“You see,” he explained, “one dog doesn’t do all the singing. He sings
one line and someone else answers with the next one, round and round
again.”

The sound sent a queer, scary thrill through Nibble Rabbit. But now he
wasn’t really afraid of the smiling hound any more than he was of Watch.

Watch sat with his ears pricked and his nostrils twitching while he
listened to the Hound’s Hunting Song. “Eh, but that’s grand!” he barked.
“It puts the tickle into your feet to be up and running.”

Nibble Rabbit squirmed closer to the Pickery Things. He wasn’t afraid of
the dogs, but he felt very queer. “It starts my feet tickling, too,” he
sniffed. “And my fur’s all fluffed out like a moulting bird.”

Trailer laughed. “That’s partly what we sing it for,” he explained. “It
rouses up you Game Beasts and gets you running, and when your coat
stands up on end your scent is easier to follow.”

“You don’t say?” Nibble’s eyes were sparkling. “Then that’s why the
Quail say ‘Hold your scent!’ when they mean ‘sleek down your feathers.’”

“Exactly,” nodded Trailer. “And they’re so clever that it takes a
special dog, who makes a business of birds, to find them. He has a
special song, too, but I never learned it. I only follow furry things.”

“That was splendid!” put in Doctor Muskrat, who had been listening
thoughtfully to the talk. He wasn’t at all sorry because the dogs had
politely left him a clear path to the water. He could have dived in a
flash if he had wanted to. “You’ve made the frogs very jealous, Mr.
Trailer.” Sure enough, the frogs were tuning up all over the pond.
“There’s something very queer about this,” he went on. “Your song
doesn’t do anything to me--because I’ve never been chased that way. But
there was one dog, a noisy little one, who used to drive me nearly out
of my wits when I was younger.”

“That might have been Spice the Terrier, who was here when I was a pup,”
said Watch. “I know his song well enough. He was always shouting it at
something.

    “A cat hunt!
    A rat hunt!
    A bird, beast, or bat hunt!
    Fur or feather, hide or skin,
    Shake him out and claw him in.
    Grip your teeth beneath his chin
    And there’s the end of that hunt.”

Watch had fairly snapped out Spice’s song.

“That’s it!” squealed the Doctor. “That’s the very song--and look at my
fur! It will take a dip in cold water to smooth it again.” He was as
fluffy as Tad Coon’s tail. “Now, Watch, what’s your song?”

“Oh, I’m no regular kind of a dog, so I really haven’t any,” said Watch,
looking a bit regretful. “I just do--whatever I’m told the best I can
and”--here his ears pricked and his tail began to wag--“I look after
Tommy Peele.”

“But why must you always do things?” said Nibble.

“Why, everyone has to have a job of some kind,” said Trailer. “Or else
he’s a worthless old scrump not worth feeding. And, if it’s really your
own special job, you enjoy doing it. I love to hunt, but I wouldn’t care
much about driving cows.”

“Sure you would if you learned how,” said Watch. “I really do.”

“There, you see?” laughed Trailer. And Nibble nodded.

“Speaking of driving cows,” smiled Trailer, “who do you think drove up
to Tommy Peele’s this morning?” He said it to tease Watch. He and Watch
had gone out before daybreak to hunt Silvertip and now it was way past
milking time.

But Watch wasn’t teased a bit.

“The cows slept in the barn,” he grinned. “Nobody had to drive them--so
there! The only job I have waiting for me right now is to clean up my
breakfast plate before Chirp Sparrow gets his scratchy little feet into
it.”

Trailer forgot all about how tired he was. “Fine,” said he. “I’m ready
to help you.” And off they trotted with their tails waving.


                              CHAPTER II
                   TAD COON’S TRICKS AND HIS TROUBLES

“I wonder why all the Tame Beasts have work to do or milk to give or
eggs or whatever it happens to be?” Nibble Rabbit remarked. “We don’t
What’s our job, Doctor Muskrat? Trailer says a Beast without a job isn’t
worth feeding.”

“That’s just the point.” The doctor’s bright eyes were twinkling. “You
silly rabbit! Do you think Trailer would be so nice and obedient to
Watch and Tommy if he didn’t know the people up at the house would feed
him? If he had to catch his breakfast or go hungry there wouldn’t be any
bunny. He licked his lips every time he sniffed you. But so long as he
does what he’s told, Tommy’ll feed him. We feed ourselves.”

“I see.” Nibble flicked his tail thoughtfully. “And we find our own
holes and take care of ourselves and we like doing it.”

“Do we, indeed?” said a whiny, complainy voice from the bulrushes on the
bank. “Is that dog gone?” It was Tad Coon. He came splashing out of the
water and flopped down in the sun. Then he got very busy with his funny
little paws. The front ones were handy ones, but the hind feet made a
print like a baby’s would except that there was a little round hole,
where the claw pricked, in front of every toe. He would wipe them in his
warm fur and lick them, one by one, with his warm tongue. Nibble
couldn’t think what he was doing.

“There,” he said at last, not quite so crossly. “I can feel with them.
The water’s awfully cold. And I had to stand in it all the time you
beasts were talking. That hound is my very worst enemy--I can’t yet see
for the life of me why he didn’t make a snap at Nibble Rabbit.”

“Because I belong to Tommy Peele,” Nibble explained. “Why don’t you make
friends with him?”

“Huh!” grunted Tad, crosser than ever. “Do you s’pose those dogs would
let me? Never!”

You know Nibble Rabbit. First he’s scared and next he’s curious. That’s
why he has such a very good time--he’s always finding out about new
things. But you don’t know Tad Coon--not yet. There’s this about Tad
Coon. First, he’s very, very unhappy and then suddenly he’s got a lovely
joke on someone.

He was very unhappy on this particular morning, though he was spread out
very comfortably in the warm sun where Trailer had lain. Still he kept
on complaining.

“It isn’t any trouble to you fellows to find a hole,” he was saying. “A
nice spot to dig and there you are. But I live in trees, and not every
tree in the woods has a big enough hollow for me to hide in. I used to
sleep in that big oak--it went and blew down in the Terrible Storm” (he
said this exactly as though the poor old oak did it on purpose), “and I
had another that the wood-duck nested in. Silvertip the Fox spoiled the
nest and he didn’t leave me a single egg, either. And I had the nicest
of all in a great big elm; now there’s a cross old mother coon with four
young ones in it. I haven’t any place to go-o-o!”

“That’s too bad,” said Doctor Muskrat, edging nearer the water because
Tad Coon’s temper isn’t very good.

“Get a square meal and then you won’t want to sit there squalling like a
blind kitten.” And in he dove.

Tad Coon didn’t dive after him. He didn’t even get angry. He just went
on wailing, “I haven’t eaten anything but frogs all spring and I’m so
sick of them I can’t bear the sight of them.”

“Try fish, then,” advised Doctor Muskrat, from the pond.

Tad Coon stopped whimpering. He looked at Doctor Muskrat, and then he
looked at Nibble Rabbit. “I believe I will,” he said. And he looked at
Nibble again. Then he walked out on the flat stone that used to be
Doctor Muskrat’s.

“Don’t go in there,” warned Nibble. “That’s right where Grandpop
Snapping Turtle just caught Silvertip the Fox.”

“I know that,” answered Tad. “I don’t dive; I go fishing. I take my
tail--” and he did it--“like this. And I tickle the water--like this.
And when a fish comes up, thinking it’s a fly just dropped in the water,
I reach out my paw and catch him. Move around behind me, so you won’t
cast a shadow. I must see what I’m doing.”

So Nibble moved around where Tad told him to and craned his neck. This
looked interesting.

Swish, swish, swish, went Tad Coon’s bushy tail. He cocked his head.
Swish--out went his hand--splash, went a great big wave all over Nibble
Rabbit.

“Ugh! Snff-snff-choo-a-a-ka-choo!” he sneezed. He stamped his feet
angrily.

Tad looked over his shoulder and then went back to his fishing as though
he didn’t know what he had done, but Nibble could hear him snort as he
tried to choke down his laughter, and his fur was shaking.

Tad was sitting right over the place where Grandpop Snapping Turtle had
caught Silvertip the Fox. Tad knew perfectly well he was there, but it
would take something smarter than a loggy old turtle to catch Tad Coon.
Besides, he knew, too, that Grandpop Snapping Turtle wouldn’t pay
attention to anything else until Silvertip was all eaten up. So he sat
there flicking the water with the tip-end of his tail, pretending he was
fooling the fish into thinking it was a fly alighting. He was trying to
think up another trick to play.

But there was one thing Tad didn’t know. He didn’t know what Doctor
Muskrat was doing. Doctor Muskrat was paddling around in the pond,
diving now and then as though he were fishing--and so he was, fishing up
trouble for Tad Coon. The first time he came up to find out the meaning
of Tad’s splash he sniffed. And it wasn’t to blow the water out of his
nose--it was to make Nibble look at him. Nibble did look. And Doctor
Muskrat closed both of his eyes in a big wink. After that you can be
pretty sure Nibble kept his eyes on that playful tail of Tad Coon.

Flick! it went. Swish! For Tad wasn’t thinking what he was doing. He had
an idea for another joke. “Pop!” Up comes the ugly head of Grandpop
Snapping Turtle, his beady eyes peering, his hissy mouth open. Snap! it
went on the end of that playful tail. Jerk! And Tad Coon was bouncing up
the bank, his fluffy breeches sticking straight out with fright. And
when Grandpop Snapping Turtle’s ugly head sank back it was wearing
whiskers--whiskers which used to belong to the very last tip-end of
that smarty coon’s tail.

And then didn’t Doctor Muskrat and Nibble Rabbit have their turn to
chuckle! Nibble laughed till he stamped, only this time he wasn’t the
one who was angry. And Doctor Muskrat paddled away round and came up on
the bank beside him.

“What made Grandpop Snapping Turtle wake up?” asked Nibble.

“Mussel shells,” giggled the wise muskrat. “You know Bobby Robin’s story
about the Babes in the Woods that the robins covered with leaves? That’s
just what I’ve been doing to Silvertip. Only leaves don’t sink, so I
used empty mussel shells. I’ve shied them down at him until Grandpop
Snapping Turtle couldn’t take a bite without getting his beak into one
of them. He thinks Tad Coon did it.”

“He-he!” snickered Nibble Rabbit. “And Tad Coon blames it all right back
on him!”


                              CHAPTER III
                   GRANDPOP’S BITE THAT NEVER LET GO

“Ow, ow, ow!” wailed Tad from way up the bank in the Pickery Things. And
he had the tip of his tail in his mouth, so you could hardly make out
what he was saying. “Ow, ow, my tail’s bitten right off!” “Do you think
it’s really as bad as all that?” asked Nibble anxiously. Tad’s eyes were
bulging so wide that they showed white all round them when he went
bouncing off the flat stone. If he were really truly hurt it wouldn’t
seem so funny. They liked him.

“Let’s go and see,” said the doctor, and he scuffled up the bank as fast
as he could travel. “Did that turtle really bite you?” he asked. “Let me
look so I’ll know what kind of a remedy to go after.”

So Tad took his tail out of his mouth and showed it to the doctor. He
wouldn’t look at it himself for fear there would be blood on it. Tad’s
very timid that way. And Doctor Muskrat examined it carefully. At last
he said: “Why, Tad Coon, there’s nothing wrong with this tail.”

“Isn’t there?” asked Tad in a relieved voice. “It felt as if there was.
It truly did.” So he took back his tail and combed the hair out and
examined it most carefully with his little handy-paws, but all he could
find was a tiny weeny bare spot at the very tip where Grandpop Snapping
Turtle had pulled the hair out. “That’s good,” he smiled with a
satisfied air. He wasn’t the least bit ashamed of having made such a
fuss about nothing.

[Illustration: Snap! went Grandpop Snapping Turtle’s mouth on Tad Coon’s
playful tail.]

He wasn’t even thinking about it. Pretty soon he burst right out
laughing. “Ho, ho! That old turtle’s got tickly coon hairs in his mouth.
I hope they set him choking.” Then he cocked his head on one side and
the most mischievous sparkle came into his dark brown eyes which peer
out from a band of dark brown fur that lies across his nose like a pair
of goggles. “I’ll get even with him,” he chuckled. “I’ll find his nest
when his wife comes out to lay her eggs on the beach and I’ll eat every
last one of them.”

“That won’t be till June,” answered Doctor Muskrat. “You’d better find
something else in the meantime. I know where there are some marshmallow
roots and we’ll all share them.”

“That sounds fine,” Tad agreed. “Just wait a minute.”

“What do you s’pose he’s up to now?” asked Nibble curiously.

But he knew in just a moment. Tad found himself a nice big rock. And he
shoved and pushed and tugged and grunted until he worked it out on the
edge of the flat stone and sent it crashing down on top of Grandpop
Snapping Turtle.

Kerchug! went the rock. And that was the last straw that broke Grandpop
Snapping Turtle’s temper. He came flopping up on land as fast as he
could travel. And he had his wicked eye on Tad Coon.

Swish, went Doctor Muskrat back into the water. That was the safest
place for him because he can swim as fast as any one and a little bit
faster than any turtle who ever flipped a paddle. Bounce, went Nibble
Rabbit clear through the woods and past the Brushpile and out into the
head of the Broad Field before he stopped to listen. Scritch, scratch,
went lazy Tad Coon to the top of a big stump where Grandpop Snapping
Turtle couldn’t reach him. And that turtle was digging in his claws and
tearing up the earth as he marched round and round it, reaching up his
long neck and hissing: “Just you wait till I get hold of your leg with
my bite that never lets go!”

“Grandpop’s lost his temper,” said Nibble to himself. “Something’s sure
to happen. It always does. It happened to Chatter Squirrel and Silvertip
the Fox, and Mrs. Hooter, and the Red Cow----” Here he pricked up his
ears, for Watch the Dog was barking at the other end of the pasture. And
Watch had Tommy Peele and Tommy’s big cousin Sandy and Trailer the Hound
with him. So he signalled Watch to hurry. Then he hurried back to hide
in the Pickery Things where he could see what that happening was going
to be. He was so curious he forgot all about Tad Coon.

But Tad Coon hadn’t forgotten about himself. He hadn’t lost his temper.
As soon as he heard the dogs coming he watched his chance while Grandpop
Snapping Turtle was on the far side of the stump and jumped over to the
nearest tree. And you should have seen his little handy-paws shin up it!

So all Tommy Peele and his cousin Sandy found was a spitting, swearing
old shellback marching round and round that stump.

“Oh-h-h!” shouted Sandy. “Turtle soup for supper. Um-m!”

“Don’t hurt him!” cried Tommy. “He doesn’t do any harm.”

“Doesn’t he?” exclaimed Sandy. “He just spoils all the fishing in your
pond, and he’s simply death on muskrats.”

Of course that settled Tommy Peele, because Doctor Muskrat was his
friend.

So Sandy took up a long stick and held it out in front of Grandpop
Snapping Turtle. “Ah-h-h!” he hissed triumphantly. And he grabbed it
right in the middle with his bite that never lets go.

“Pick up the other end,” said Sandy. Tommy did, and there they had the
turtle hanging between them, so blazing angry and so proud of his bite
that won’t let go, that he never noticed that they were carrying him
farther and farther away from his pond. And that was the last Nibble
ever saw of him.


                              CHAPTER IV
                    TAD’S TRICKS COME HOME TO ROOST

But there was a whole lot of excitement near the Pond. There was Tad
Coon snug in the crotch of a tree, there was Trailer the Hound sniffing
the top of the stump where Tad had sat to keep out of reach of the angry
turtle, and there was Nibble Rabbit snuggled beneath the Pickery Things,
so curious that he couldn’t sit still.

Pretty soon Trailer began to whimper. “Coon, coon, coon,” he said to
himself. “Where did he come from? Where did he go?” And he was so
puzzled that he shook his head until his ears flopped.

That was too much for Tad Coon. He pulled off a strip of bark and
dropped it right on top of Trailer. The hound jumped as though something
had stung him.

And wasn’t Nibble surprised? He didn’t see how Tad dared play tricks on
the very dog he said was his worst enemy.

Pretty soon Tad began to call out: “Hey; you hound, go away! I want to
come down before that Man with the gun gets back here.”

“Go away?” barked Trailer. “I most certainly won’t. I’ll stay right here
and keep you until I see what Sandy and Tommy Peele want to do with
you.”

“Tommy won’t hurt you,” shouted Nibble. “He’ll just make friends with
you.”

“No, thank you,” grinned Tad Coon. “Not the way he makes friends. I
don’t want to be trapped like you and Doctor Muskrat, and I don’t want
to be hunted like Silvertip the Fox. I’m going.”

“But you haven’t been stealing his chickens like Silvertip did,” argued
Nibble.

“How do you know?” asked Tad. For it was his guilty conscience that made
him afraid. He didn’t exactly steal Tommy Peele’s chickens, but he had
eaten some eggs that were very nearly hatched. And all this time Nibble
could see him working away at something with his little handy-paws.
Pretty soon he called again: “Mister Hound, I asks you for the last
time, are you going to let me down?”

“Yah!” barked Trailer. “I ’most certainly am not.”

“Hm,” sniffed Tad Coon. “We’ll see about that, then.” Blam! He hit
Trailer square on the head with something. And this time the hound
jumped because he really was stung. “Ow, ow, ow!” he yelped, and he
started for home on the run with a trail of buzzing insects strung out
behind him.

[Illustration: Tad Coon hits Trailer on the head with a hornet’s nest.]

“Run, run, run!” squalled Tad. “Look at that hound run! He’s only
hitting the high spots. Ye-a-o-u-w! See him go!” And he danced about on
the limb until the limb danced with him.

Trailer was surely running--faster than ever he’d run on any trail. But
this time he wasn’t chasing any one--the buzzers were chasing him. For
it wasn’t a piece of bark Tad threw down the last time--it was the fat
round nest of some paper wasps.

Nibble Rabbit wasn’t seeing any of the fun. He knew something about
paper wasps. They were buzzing all over everywhere, and they don’t care
who they sting when they get angry. He sat very still in the Pickery
Things with his twitchy nose tucked down between his furry feet, and his
waggly ears laid flat back, and his bright eyes squinched up as tight as
ever he could shut them. Some of those wasps flew right by him and never
knew he was anything but a round stone--not even the one that tangled
its legs in his whiskers. He did feel awfully sorry for poor Trailer;
but all the same Tad Coon had been pretty smart to send him home.

But Tad Coon wasn’t quite as smart as he thought he was. Trailer ran so
fast that he left most of those wasps behind him. And he went bouncing
through the brush at such a rate that he scraped a lot more off of him.
Pretty soon they began coming back to where their nest had been. And
they couldn’t find it. That didn’t improve their tempers, I can tell
you. But if they couldn’t find their nest, they certainly could find Tad
Coon. And just didn’t they?

Now it was Tad’s turn to howl. “Ow-ow-ow!” he cried. And he squinched up
his eyes as tight as ever Nibble did and began to scramble down as fast
as ever his little handy-paws would let him. But when he opened his
mouth a wasp stung him right on the tongue, and when he shut it his
little black nose got the stinging. And when he tried to cover it with
his paw he lost his hold and went tumbling down to the ground.

Blam! It almost knocked the breath out of him. But he rolled over and
over till he found his feet and then he scuttled to Doctor Muskrat’s
Pond as fast as he could limp on three of them. He kept trying to brush
the wasps off his nose and ears with the other one, until he could jump
into the water. And then he splashed around as hard as ever he could.
The wasps didn’t like that a little bit, because they can’t fly when
their wings get wet. So they went away and left him.

Then poor Tad Coon began shouting: “Do’ Mu’a! Do’ Mu’a!” Because his
poor stung tongue couldn’t say Doctor Muskrat.

He wished he hadn’t dropped that wasps’ nest down on Trailer. And he
wished those wasps hadn’t come back and stung him. And he wished he
hadn’t fallen out of the tree and bumped himself. And he wished his nose
wasn’t swollen up so he couldn’t see around it. And he wished his poor
tongue wasn’t hanging out of the corner of his mouth with such a great
big sting that he couldn’t say any of his wishes. All he could do was
shout “Do’ Mu’a!” when he was trying with all his might to shout “Doctor
Muskrat!” And Doctor Muskrat wouldn’t come.

But Nibble Rabbit did. And when he heard Tad Coon’s great big sobs and
saw the tears in his eyes he felt mighty sorry for him. So he began to
thump and pound for the doctor.

Pretty soon Doctor Muskrat came out on top of his house in the middle of
the pond and answered. “I hear you,” he snapped. “And I heard Tad Coon
in the first place. But I’m not going to do anything for him. I don’t
mind the funny tricks he plays, but that one just played on Trailer the
Hound was cruel.”

“I ’o,” sniffed Tad. “I i’ ‘o’ i’ u’ hu’ ho.”

“He didn’t know it would hurt so,” Nibble translated. “Don’t scratch
your ears, Tad. Come over and let me lick them.”

“That’s no excuse,” said Doctor Muskrat severely. “What if Tommy Peele
thinks we did it? That hound can’t explain. And he doesn’t know anybody
else is here with us.”

“Yes, but Tad doesn’t know Tommy,” Nibble pleaded. “He’s awfully afraid
of being caught. You know how that hurts your own self. And lots of
times they put coons in cages, and I didn’t like my cage. But he’s sorry
as anything that he did it.”

“So I see,” said the doctor, just as gruffly as ever, and he dove back
into the pond. Poor Tad hitched himself over to the flat stone so Nibble
could fix his ears while he splashed the cool water over his nose and
tongue. My, but he was meek! He didn’t even blame Doctor Muskrat for
being angry with him.

Then suddenly up popped a head right beside him. “Open your mouth,” said
the doctor. “Bite on that.” And he slipped a soft, soothing chewed root
poultice on to Tad’s tongue. “Now raise your head.” And he clapped a
blue clay plaster on Tad’s nose. “Snort!” And Tad snorted a pair of
holes to breathe through. “There,” said he; “you’ll be all right before
long.”

But Nibble had his ears pricked. “There comes Watch,” he said. “I heard
him bark. Tad can’t run.”

“You hide him in the Pickery Things,” ordered the doctor. “I’ll try to
get this matter settled.”

“M-m-m-m!” grunted Tad Coon gratefully through his poultice. And he
limped off after Nibble, still holding up his nose.


                               CHAPTER V
              THE TIME TAD COON WAS TRICKIER THAN HE KNEW

“Aough, aough!” barked Watch. “Yah!” he yapped breathlessly when he
found Doctor Muskrat sitting out on the flat stone, waiting to meet him.
“You’re just who I was looking for. Trailer just stumbled up to the
house with his eyes bunged shut and his nose as big as a soupbone,
mumbling something about a coon as near as I can understand him. But no
coon ever did anything like that to him.”

The doctor cocked his ears. “Can’t talk, can’t he? Poor fellow. Did you
try what blue clay will do for him? I’ll get you some.”

[Illustration: Tad Coon needs Doctor Muskrat.]

“Ok, he’ll be all right. His master Sandy’s working over him,” Watch
answered. “But what did do it?”

“Those striped buzzers with hot spots in their tails. They’re over there
guarding the nest that fell down on Trailer. The rest of them are
building a new one up in that tree--and you just ought to have seen what
they did to poor Tad Coon. He was up there hiding.”

“Well, you just tell him to stay hidden, too,” whined Watch, stretching
his stiff legs thoughtfully. “I’ve had enough of hunting after Silvertip
the Fox to last me awhile.”

“But what happened to Grandpop Snapping Turtle?” called Nibble from the
Pickery Things.

“He’s in a pot on the fire right now,” answered Watch.

“What’s a pot? What’s a fire?” asked the two wild folks.

“Fire? You know fire. When men make that red spot that’s all hot--like a
buzzer’s tail, you know--come out of the end of a stick--that’s fire,”
he explained.

“They do it to the bulrushes,” nodded the doctor. “The red spot gets
bigger and bigger until everything’s red and then the hot things
disappear.”

“Exactly. But men don’t always let it make everything red. They keep it
in one place and use it to cook with. They’re cooking Grandpop.”

“Cooking?” echoed Nibble and Doctor Muskrat.

“Bare bones and broken biscuits!” sniffed Watch. “I can’t explain that
to you any more than I can explain about the buzzers to Tommy Peele. But
I can show them to him--and I’d better.” So off he set with his tail
drooping because he was puzzled.

“It isn’t so very queer that Tommy Peele’s own dog can’t tell him that
Grandpop Snapping Turtle ate Silvertip, when you really come to think
about it,” observed Nibble Rabbit thoughtfully. “Tommy can’t even talk
to the tame beasts. That’s why Watch has to take him all the way down
here to the pond to show him these striped buzzers before he’ll
understand who bit Trailer. But I don’t see why Watch can’t tell us what
Tommy did to Grandpop Snapping Turtle. They certainly didn’t put an ugly
thing like that in any cage.”

“There!” exclaimed Doctor Muskrat. “He can’t make us understand what
he’s talking about because we Woodsfolk haven’t the words for things
we’ve never seen. Those man-words Watch uses don’t mean anything to us.
You talk about a cage. I don’t know what you mean and you can’t even
tell me.”

“Why, a cage,” Nibble began--“a cage is a sort of a cave, only it isn’t
in the ground. It bites like wood, but it doesn’t look like any tree I
ever saw, and it has something in front of it that you can see through
and the wind can blow through, but you can’t jump through it.” Now we
might guess that was a packing-box with a big open front of
chicken-wire. But even Nibble couldn’t be sure of wood when its bark was
off.

“Um-hm!” grinned Doctor Muskrat. “A cave that isn’t in the ground? Wood
that isn’t in a tree? What does that mean?”

Nibble laughed at himself. To one of the Woodsfolk it did sound foolish.

“Now if a cage is like a barn, only little,” said the doctor, “I can
think about it. I’ve seen a barn from the outside, and if it’s hollow
like a tree I can guess what the inside is like.”

“It is! It is!” Nibble cried. “Why didn’t I think of that?”

“Then Grandpop Snapping Turtle can’t live in one. He can’t eat unless
he’s under water. Watch says Tommy’s cooking him. I don’t know what that
means, either, but I can guess. Tommy eats him. There isn’t anything
that hasn’t someone who eats it and no one else can eat Grandpop unless
Tommy Peele does.”

“Maybe,” Nibble agreed; “but the real question is what will Tommy do to
Tad Coon. Tad can’t run away, and Watch knows he’s here. If Tommy is
very angry because Tad made those striped buzzers bite Trailer he’ll
make Watch find him.”

“If Tommy’s eaten Grandpop he won’t be a bit hungry,” began Doctor
Muskrat hopefully. Then a bright idea struck him. “And Tommy’ll never
know Tad’s to blame. No one can tell him!”

“That’s so!” Nibble exclaimed. “No one can!”

All the same, when Nibble heard Watch bringing Tommy to the woods to
show him the paper wasps’ nest so he’d know who bit Trailer, the rabbit
couldn’t help feeling that something would go wrong. Tommy would find
out and then wouldn’t he be angry with Tad Coon! And neither Nibble nor
Doctor Muskrat could bear to have Tad hunted like Silvertip the Fox.
Poor Tad couldn’t even run.

Watch galloped up to the wasps’ nest and barked. “There they are, Tommy.
They did it. Those are the buzzers with hot tails I’ve been trying to
tell you about.”

“That’s funny,” said Tommy, and he looked right up into the tree. The
wasps up there were buzzing over which was the best twig to begin
building another nest on. “I wonder how it came to fall down.”

Of course Nibble didn’t understand him--but Watch did! “Yow!” he barked.
“That coon made it fall. Trailer was trying to tell me. Coon, coon,
coon!” he sang, sniffing around to find him.

“Lie still,” warned Doctor Muskrat, who was hiding with Tad in the
Pickery Things.

“I can’t,” whimpered Tad. “This place is all right for a rabbit, but the
pond is where I belong.” And with that he staggered to his feet and
started for it. But right on the edge of the bank he stumbled. Down he
rolled, paws over fur, with Nibble Rabbit and Doctor Muskrat scuttling
after him.

“Look out!” barked Watch. “Let me get at him. He’ll fight like anything!
They always do.”

“Come here, Watch! Go lie down!” shouted Tommy Peele.

“Why?” whimpered Watch. But Tommy Peele never answered. He couldn’t!
There was Tad Coon sniffling through his puffy nose, peering through his
squinty eyes, snarling with his swollen lips, and all smeared with
Doctor Muskrat’s mud plaster and chewed root poultice. He was making the
awfullest faces you ever saw. Maybe you think Tommy Peele could help
laughing at him. Well, you couldn’t your own self.

“You lucky coon!” squealed Nibble. “When he laughs he can’t stay angry.”

[Illustration: At the edge of Doctor Muskrat’s pond.]


                              CHAPTER VI
             TAD MAKES A COMPACT WITH WATCH AND TOMMY PEELE

“Ha, ha, ha!” laughed Tommy. “You ought to see yourself. You look a
funny picture of a coon with the lines all wiggly.” And Tad Coon
certainly did.

But pretty soon Tommy stopped laughing. “You poor beast,” he said in a
sorry voice; “it must hurt you awfully.” Nibble Rabbit knew that voice.
It was the same one he had used when he took Nibble out of the wire trap
and when he let Doctor Muskrat out of the cold steel jaws that had
bitten his toe off.

“Er-yow!” argued Watch, Tommy’s dog. He meant it was all Tad’s fault.

“Bz-z-z!” went the wasps who were guarding their nest on the ground
until the little white grubs in it should hatch. They meant that they
had something to say about it.

But Tommy didn’t understand and he didn’t care. “Be still, Watch!” he
ordered. Then he took a long branch and speared the nest on the tip of
it. Splash! He sent it into the middle of Doctor Muskrat’s pond. Some of
the wasps were drowned and the rest flew up into the tree, buzzing with
all their wings that the old nest was bewitched and they wouldn’t have
anything more to do with it. So there it floated wherever the wind blew
it, like a deserted ship. And the wind began blowing it right back to
Tad Coon.

“Come on, Tad,” called Doctor Muskrat from the pond. “Tommy isn’t going
to hurt you.” So Tad limped down and took a drink and washed himself.

Then he felt a lot better. After all, there aren’t very many places
where his fur is so short a wasp can sting him.

Nibble looked at Tad, and then he looked at Tommy. “I think Tommy means
to be friends,” he said. “But he hasn’t brought you anything to eat
yet.”

“He’s brought this,” answered Tad, and he waded out and caught the
wasps’ nest. Then he sat himself down on Doctor Muskrat’s nice, warm
stone and picked the fat white grubs out of it with his clever little
fingery toes. “Mm’m!” he grunted contentedly with his mouth full.

He was so busy and sober about it that he set Tommy laughing all over
again. Nibble twiddled his tail thoughtfully. “Doctor Muskrat,” he
remarked, “I’m beginning to wonder if Tommy makes friends with us
because he caught us or because he felt sorry we were hurt?”

Right then Watch spoke up. “I haven’t made friends with Tad, and you
remember I don’t always take Tommy when I go hunting.”

“Be still, Watch!” Tommy ordered. “I want to see what’s going to happen
next.”

“Nothing, now,” Watch answered. “But it will just as soon as you aren’t
here to stop me.” And he laid his nose on his paws and rolled the whites
of his eyes at Tad.

“Why?” demanded Nibble. Just the way he cocked his ears made Tommy
understand that he and Watch were talking, though he couldn’t even hear
the Woodsfolk.

“Because Tad’s just as bad as Silvertip the Fox,” snarled Watch. “He
eats Tommy’s eggs and his chickens--and he eats rabbits, too, when he’s
smart enough to catch them, you silly bunny. And you ought to see what
he does to the green corn that’s sprouting in the Broad Field.”

“He doesn’t!” gasped Nibble. “He could have caught me a dozen times. I
don’t believe it.”

But Tad Coon looked down his nose at his bad little handy-paws, he was
so ashamed, and nodded. “Yes, I do,” he owned honestly. “After I’ve
slept through the winter I come out in the spring so terrible starvation
hungry. But I wouldn’t eat you. I’d rather dig grubs from a rotten log,
even if we haven’t any compact.” And Nibble knew he meant it.

But Watch didn’t. “A lot of good that would do!” he snarled.

“That’s just what the cows said about their compact with you dogs
in the First-Off Beginning,” interrupted Doctor Muskrat in his
sober voice. “But you did keep it. Tad Coon isn’t one of the
Things-from-under-the-Earth that Mother Nature herself can’t
trust. Let’s all make a compact. Why fight unless you have to?”

Now this was very wise, because no dog likes to fight with a coon. “I’ll
make this much of a compact,” said Watch. “I won’t bother Tad Coon as
long as he behaves himself. If he doesn’t--Gr-r-rr!”

“All right,” Tad agreed cheerfully, for he meant to be very, very good.
All the same, he floundered into the pond and brought up a clam to give
Watch, just as though it were a regular compact. Watch didn’t eat it of
course, but he did touch his tongue to it. “I s’pose you’d think it
awfully funny if that shelly thing bit me,” he grinned, and he even
wagged his tail. Then Nibble sniffed of it, and Doctor Muskrat--and of
course Tommy was so puzzled he picked it up and put it in his pocket. He
wanted to ask his father if there was anything the matter with it. But
the beasts thought he was in the compact, too, so they were all happy.

Nobody dreamed that Bad One was hiding in the willows across the pond,
listening to every word Watch had spoken and saying to himself: “It
won’t take me long to start some trouble there.” And it didn’t.


                              CHAPTER VII
                      BLACK CRIME IN THE HEN HOUSE

The woods weren’t peaceful at all next morning. Watch came tearing down
to Doctor Muskrat’s Pond with the bristles pricked up on his shoulders
and his teeth snapping. “Where’s that coon?” he snarled. “Give me that
coon. He’s broken his compact already. Now I will have to kill him, and
you might just as well have let me do it yesterday.”

Doctor Muskrat popped his head out of the pond. “What’s the matter?” he
asked. “And where’s Tommy Peele?”

“He’s coming,” snapped Watch. “And he knows who did it, too.”

“Then he knows more than you do,” called Nibble Rabbit, hurrying through
the Pickery Things. “Tad Coon hasn’t been out of the woods a single
minute.”

“He has!” snarled Watch. “He’s slit the throats of every chick belonging
to old Topknot--the hen who was good to you, Nibble Rabbit. Perhaps
that’s one of his jokes.”

“Oh-h-h!” gasped Nibble. “But what makes you sure it was Tad?”

“Topknot says it was someone who wore stripes. Who else could it be?”

“The cat!” guessed Nibble. “She wears them.”

“No, it wasn’t! I smelled, and it didn’t smell like her.”

“Then smell of me,” said Tad. And he marched right out of the Pickery
Things, not a bit afraid because he did-n’t have a guilty conscience.
“It won’t smell like me, either.”

So when Tommy Peele came running up, there stood Tad Coon with his fur
all fluffed up to let the scent out (you remember how the quails sleeked
their feathers to hold it), but he wasn’t snarling. He wasn’t even
angry. And Watch was sniffing carefully all around him.

“Sic him! S-s-s-sic him!” called Tommy Peele. My, but he was the angry
one.

“No,” barked Watch. “Beg pardon, Tad. It wasn’t your smell, either.”

“Whoever it was,” said Nibble, “I’m coming up to the barn to help find
him.”

Maybe you think Tommy Peele wasn’t puzzled! “S-s-s-sic him!” he ordered
impatiently. “Whatever is the matter with you, anyway? You aren’t scared
of him, are you? Yesterday you wanted to kill him for nothing at all,
and to-day you won’t touch him. But if he didn’t kill all poor Topknot’s
little chicks, who did? It’s a regular coon trick--dad says so. S-s-sic
him! Go on!”

“A-aour-r!” Watch whined unhappily. “If I only could tell you that it
wasn’t Tad Coon!”

“We’ve just got to find out for ourselves and show him,” said Nibble
Rabbit. “The sooner we start the fresher the scent,” he quoted from an
old dog-song. “Come along.”

“I’m coming, too,” announced Tad Coon. “This is some of my business.”

“No, you’re not,” said Nibble. “We don’t want another paw-mark until we
examine every trail up by the barn.”

“That’s right,” said Watch. “That kind of a thief doesn’t fly. I didn’t
stop to look because I was so sure I knew who did it.”

“But you couldn’t make any mistake about mine,” protested Tad, holding
up his handy-paw. “No one, not even my cousin Gurf Bear, who has hind
feet like mine, has one anything like it.”

Now Tommy was angry enough about those chicks of Topknot the Hen’s, but
he was angrier yet because Watch wouldn’t obey him. “You’re a bad, bad
dog!” he scolded. “I’m going right over to get Trailer. He isn’t
afraid.” And you know Trailer the Hound, who belonged to Tommy’s big
cousin Sandy, was Tad Coon’s worst enemy.

“There!” Watch exclaimed. “You see you’d better keep away. Trailer won’t
make any compact with you, and he wouldn’t even listen if I tried to
explain how your tracks came to be there, but if you don’t leave any
he’ll tell Tommy so the same way I’ve been trying to.” And Watch
galloped off to catch up with the cross little boy.

But Tommy wouldn’t forgive him no matter how much Watch begged and
explained. Only when he passed the place where the dead chicks had lain
he cried, “Why, they aren’t all here! That killer must have come back
after them.” He saw Watch sniff them just as carefully as he had sniffed
Tad Coon down by the pond. And he knew just where Tad Coon had been
every minute of the time. Tad didn’t take them. So now he understood.
“All right, Watch. Good dog,” he said. “It wasn’t the coon. Then who was
it? S-s-sic him!”

And maybe you think that didn’t make Watch happy!

If Nibble hadn’t been in such a hurry to get up to the barn and see
Topknot’s little dead chicks he might have found who really killed them
all the sooner. But here was a new killer whom no one had ever seen, so
no one knew how to hide from him or where to expect him. No wonder
Nibble was too excited to think of listening at the Brushpile for the
Bad Little Owls.

Just about the time he went slipping down the fence row under the safe
pickers of the blackberry canes they were having their first full meal
since Chaik and his family mauled them for trying to help Silvertip.
Chaik had pulled out so many feathers that they couldn’t hunt well. And
now they had swallowed one of those fuzzy little chickens, fluff, legs,
and all, because they were so hungry.

“My, but that chick tasted good,” said the Lady Owl. “Do you know, when
Stripes came waddling by this morning and bragged about what he’d done,
I didn’t believe him. I don’t see why he didn’t eat every last one of
them instead of leaving them for us.”

“He didn’t leave them for us at all,” snapped the he owl. “And don’t you
ever tell him we took one, either. He just killed them and laid them out
in a neat row so it would look like one of Tad Coon’s tricks. Then that
boy would think it was the coon and make all sorts of trouble for him.”

“Why doesn’t Stripes like Tad Coon?” said his mate thoughtfully.

“He’s jealous because Tad has a compact with that shaggy dog so it won’t
chase him, and he’s mad because it’s getting to such a pass in the woods
and fields that you hardly dare rob a nest for fear that rabbit will
tell on you.”

“What happens then?” asked his wife, sleepily, for it was long after
sunup.

“That’s the mystery,” he answered in an awed voice. “But Silvertip has
disappeared, and Grandpop Snapping Turtle, and you know yourself that
Foulfang the Rattlesnake was nothing more than ant food when we found
him.”

“Then you aren’t going to help Stripes? He might feed us.”

“I’m not going to help any one but myself. And right now I’ll help
myself to one more chicken. I could sleep right through a full moon if I
had a full stomach. Stripes is asleep in the oak that blew down in the
Terrible Storm. Keep your eye on him. We can take what he leaves without
helping him fight that rabbit.” And off he flew, steering very badly
with his ragged tail.

But Nibble Rabbit wouldn’t have known who Stripes was, even if he had
overheard the little owls.

[Illustration: The bad little Owl comes flipping by.]


                             CHAPTER VIII
                      HOW NIBBLE TURNED DETECTIVE

The very first thing Nibble did when he got to the barn was to hunt up
poor Topknot. He had a hard time finding her. For he had to be very
careful himself, I can tell you. He listened and peeked behind every
corner, expecting to see the flashing eyes and snarling teeth of the
killer no one knew.

That was why the Bad Little Owl didn’t see him when he came flipping by.
“What’s he doing out this time of day?” thought Nibble. Then he saw, for
the little owl swooped down and staggered off with a furry yellow chick.
Its poor head was dangling, and it was such a load that he could
scarcely lift it above the bushes, and he steered more crookedly than
ever. As he passed a clump of burdock, out dashed Topknot, squawking and
screeching, and it was only by sheer luck that he escaped her beak.

“That owl never killed them, did he?” asked Nibble when he came up with
the hen.

“Not while I was with them,” she answered, ruffling up her feathers. “He
wouldn’t dare. No. It was a furry thing with stripes. He’d reach in his
paw and draw them out from under me--so gently at first I didn’t know
what he was doing.”

Now that certainly did sound a lot like Tad Coon. “Did he have a black
mask across his face?” Nibble wanted to know.

“It was so very dark I couldn’t see,” she clucked. “He had a bushy tail
and no matter where I tried to attack him he kept his back turned.”

No wonder Watch the Dog had thought it was Tad. Even Nibble felt
doubtful. He was a very sober rabbit when he hopped over to where Watch
and Tommy Peele were examining the chicks.

“They’re not all here. The killer’s come back for them!” Tommy was just
shouting excitedly. “We’ve been with him all the time, so it’s not the
coon. What is it?” But Nibble knew that the little owl had taken them,
and he certainly wasn’t the killer, either.

Watch sniffed very carefully. “It isn’t Tad’s smell,” he whined,
circling about. Suddenly he barked, bristling. “But it certainly is his
trail!” For there right beneath his nose was a hind footprint, something
like a baby’s, and very much more like Tad Coon’s. “He won’t fool me
again,” Watch raged. “I’ll fix him!”

“Wait a minute,” Nibble protested.

“That’s too small to be Tad. It might be another coon. No, no! It hasn’t
a handy-paw. Look!” For the print of the forefoot was clawed and padded
like Watch’s own, and not a bit like any coon’s.

Watch sat right down. This was too puzzling for him.

“We’ll find out yet,” Nibble encouraged him. “You look out up here--you
might catch him, red-toothed, any minute. I’m going to see what the
little owls know about him.”

But he didn’t tell why he was sure they knew.

Now if Nibble had gone straight to Doctor Muskrat and asked, “Who has a
hind footprint like a little coon’s and a front one like a dog’s?” the
wise old doctor would have told him in a moment.

But he didn’t. Because Tad was down at Doctor Muskrat’s Pond waiting for
him, to know if Tommy Peele believed him. How could Nibble say, “Well,
we’re pretty sure you told the truth, but we can’t find any one else to
lay it to. The real killer must be too smart for us.” So he just crept
into the Brushpile beneath the two little owls, asleep like two small
knots on their limb.

They slept late, for they had feasted on those chicks that morning. It
was almost dark before they stretched their wings and twiddled their
stumpy tails. “Have you seen anything of Stripes?” asked the Lady Owl,
polishing her beak on the rough bark, just the way you want to brush
your teeth before breakfast. “Or are you going back for another chick?”

“No,” answered her mate. “I’d rather follow him.” And he flew over to
the hollow in the fallen oak. “He’s gone!” he cried when he came back
again. “He’s been gone a long time. His scent’s quite cold.”

“That’s no sign,” she said cheerfully. “Stripes can leave less scent
than any fur I ever knew, when he pleases--and make more when he isn’t
pleased!”

Nibble almost squealed. “Stripes is a skunk! I’ve never seen him, but
Watch has. What a joke on that dog!” What Nibble had learned surely
would have burst out of him if she hadn’t added: “Never mind, we’ll find
him fast enough.” And off they flew.

“So will I,” chuckled Nibble, racing along behind them.

He’d have lost them in the dark, because they flew zig-zagging all
about, if they hadn’t kept calling to each other all the while. “Where?
Where?” they cried every other minute. Then “Here! Here!” shouted the
little he owl “Under the bridge!” And, sure enough, Nibble could see a
white thing moving around by the bridge across the brook that came out
of the lower end of Doctor Muskrat’s Pond.

He could make out the queer blotchy streaks of white that Stripes was
named from. The white tuft was probably the tip of his tail. Oh, yes, he
could see that skunk all right enough--but he couldn’t see someone else
who was hunting clams right beside Stripes. He could only hear.

“Get out! I’ve taken this hunting ground.” That was a horrid, snarly
voice.

“All right. Then I’ll be moving right along.” That was the fat, smily
voice of Tad Coon. In the dark you couldn’t see his stripes at all.
There was splashing.

“Ah! Wah! Yah! Gr-r-r-yah!” yelped the snarly voice. Then Nibble smelled
the awfullest smell you ever imagined--the smell of Stripes when he
isn’t pleased.

Nibble’s nose was twitching so fast he had to wipe it on the nice damp
earth, just as the little owl wiped her beak on the rough bark of her
perch. But he stayed there, squeezed in between the stems of a leafy
elder bush, trying to guess what had happened.

Pat-pat, came leisurely footsteps. “Uh-huh,” coughed a voice. Then
someone snorted. Nibble’s ears flew up; he knew that sound. Tad Coon was
trying to keep from laughing. Pat-pat, went his handy-paws, and then
there was a splashing and a scrubbing. Nibble hopped down to the pond,
and there was Tad squirming about in the damp sand.

“That you, Nibble?” Tad asked as he heard the soft lip-it, lip-it of
Nibble’s furry feet. “Keep to windward. Keep to windward, if you don’t
want to strangle, as I’m almost doing.” He was lying on his back and he
stopped squirming while he spoke. Nibble could see his limp paws fairly
shaking with laughter.

“Whew, I should say so! What happened? Did you have a fight with
Stripes?” Nibble asked curiously as he moved around Tad. “You aren’t
hurt, are you?”

“Hurt!” snorted Tad. “Of course not. Stripes Skunk won’t fight. He
doesn’t have to. He wouldn’t face any one anywhere near his own size--he
just turns around so you can’t find anything but the tip of his tail to
chew on. And that’s all shaggy, slippery hairs, so you couldn’t possibly
get a grip on it, and if you did he knows he could make you let go. He
has this scent,” Tad sniffed disgustedly, “and it’s worse than any bite
he could give because it shows all your enemies where you are.”

“But Watch was trying to follow Stripes, because he’s the killer of
those poor little chicks up at the barn, and he could hardly trail him
at all.”

“Of course not,” Tad giggled, “Stripes hates it himself. He’s so afraid
of getting it on his own fur that he won’t use it unless someone’s
foolish enough to plague him into it--like me,” he finished, sanding a
new spot to get it clean. “But Watch can trail him now.”

“What did you do?” My, but Nibble was curious to know.

Tad looked half ashamed, the way he always does when his tricks come
back on him. “Well, he just would turn his back on me--and he was so
rude and there was a mussel, such a big one, with a big sharp shell--so
all the time I was being so polite I was letting it close on the end of
his tail. And he couldn’t make it let go when he wanted to. My, but
wasn’t he scared!”

So that was Tad’s trick. It was certainly clever, but Nibble didn’t
sleep very close to him that night.


                              CHAPTER IX
                   STRIPES SKUNK LEARNS HOW TO BEHAVE

Early, early in the morning Stripes Skunk came snooping into the Pickery
Things. Of course they caught hold of him until Nibble Rabbit waked up.
And as soon as he sniffed that scent in the air he said, “Is that you,
Tad Coon?”

“No,” said a meek, whiny voice; “it’s me, Stripes Skunk. I’ve been
talking with the little owls. Please, won’t you make a compact with me?”

“Compact!” Nibble exclaimed. “Of course I won’t! And no one else will!”
At that Stripes began to cry. “Won’t you even try me?” he sobbed. “I’d
not want to be friends. I just want to be let alone as long as I’m good.
Won’t you give me a chance to show you how very good I can be?”

So Nibble finally promised to talk things over with Watch and Doctor
Muskrat. Doctor Muskrat didn’t say anything, but he waited out on his
flat stone for Watch. And when Watch came he fairly howled at the idea.

“Make a compact with that murderer?” he barked. “Not when he’s killed
those little chicks that belong to Tommy Peele. I’ll kill him.”

“Watch,” said Doctor Muskrat, “who made you executioner of all the woods
and fields? Killing Stripes won’t give back those chicks to Tommy Peele.
But if you put Stripes to work instead, he can pay back for them. He can
keep down the mice who steal Tommy’s grain; he can kill snakes, and
locusts, and beetles, and all manner of grubs. If he just picks bugs off
Tommy’s potatoes he’ll pay for all the harm he’s done.”

Watch put his head to one side. He could remember how Tommy hated to
pick the bugs off those potatoes. “Wurff,” he growled at last. “I wish I
knew what Tommy would think about it. I’ll wait until I know.”

As soon as Doctor Muskrat had finished speaking, Watch went rambling up
to the old house with his ears laid back. He wanted to get a nice
comfortable bone in a quiet corner and think about it. Doctor Muskrat
was right; no one, not even Tommy Peele, had appointed him executioner
of the woods and fields, and he’d been pretty quick about wanting to
kill every one who did any harm, instead of letting them learn
better--if they would. You see, a dog is so big and strong he has to be
careful not to bully the other beasts. No decent dog can be happy if he
does that. But he couldn’t make up his mind that Stripes Skunk deserved
to be trusted.

Neither did Nibble Rabbit. He wanted to know what every other one of the
Woodsfolk thought about it. Right now he knew that Stripes was waiting
to find out what Watch had decided to do to him, and yet he couldn’t
help shaking at the idea of going to talk with him. For the first thing
every mother rabbit teaches the fluffy bunny babies, as soon as they
open their eyes, is to run from anything that has the strange and scary
scent of the Things-from-under-the-Earth, whether they wear scales or
fur. Snakes have it just the same as Stripes the Skunk, or Slyfoot the
Mink, or the weasel whom the Woodsfolk usually mean when they speak of
the Killer. He’s so terribly bloodthirsty and cruel that they never give
him any other name.

But when Nibble found Stripes waiting patiently beside his Pickery
Things, right where the faithful thorns had warned him to stop when he
came begging for help that morning, even a scarier rabbit than Nibble
wouldn’t have been afraid. Stripes was trembling and trying his best not
to cry. “What did he say?” he begged anxiously. “Please, Nibble, quick!
What did that big dog say? It’s too late for me to try to run away from
him. He could trail me anywhere, and I’m so slow he’d overtake me in
just a little while.”

“He’s gone off to make up his mind,” said Nibble. “Doctor Muskrat put in
a word for you. He said that if you hunted the mice in Tommy Peele’s
grain and kept the potato bugs off his vines, you could pay Tommy back
for those chicks you killed, if you didn’t do any more harm.”

“I will! I will!” chattered Stripes. “I just love mice and potato bugs,
too. Only I thought those chicks belonged to a hen. Who’s Tommy Peele?”

[Illustration: Nibble accuses Stripes of stealing.]

“Why, Tommy Peele is a boy. He owns all these woods and fields, and the
hen as well. That’s why Watch, his dog, takes care of them all,” Nibble
began.

“But what’s a boy?” Stripes demanded, his eyes opened very wide.

“A boy? Why, he’s a man’s kitten,” Nibble explained patiently. (Kittens
are what Stripes calls his own young.) “This is his hunting ground. But
he only hunts Bad Ones. We Woodsfolk aren’t afraid of him, and Doctor
Muskrat is his special friend.”

“I must thank Doctor Muskrat,” exclaimed Stripes very eagerly. “I’d like
to bring him a present--how about a nice fresh egg? I just found some
here.”

And just then Bob White’s wife, over in the Quail’s Thicket, began to
scream. “Prr-whit! My nest! Someone’s spoiled my beautiful eggs!
Prr-whit! Two of them are nothing but empty shells,” she wailed. And the
air was filled with whirring wings. Every other quail in the covey who
wasn’t sitting on eggs of her own had come to see what was the matter.
And my, but weren’t they angry!

But Nibble Rabbit was angrier still. “You took those eggs!” he accused
Stripes. “You just finished telling me so. And you were trying to
pretend you would be good. Is that your way?” He looked savage enough to
kick Stripes and send him end over end. That’s the rabbit way of
fighting. He stamped his feet.

But Stripes never bared a tooth to defend himself. He just turned his
back, just as Tad said he always did, and hunched himself into a little
ball. “I did,” he confessed. “I did take them but I didn’t know it was
bad. Truly I didn’t. Please don’t look that way. I don’t want to do
anything more to be sorry for.”

“Then why did you steal?” Nibble demanded.

“I just found them,” Stripes pleaded. “There wasn’t any one with them at
all. I knew I mustn’t kill any more quail, but eggs are different.
Aren’t they?” he asked anxiously.

“No,” said Nibble. “They are not. This year’s eggs are next year’s
quail. If we let every one help himself to all the eggs he came across
there wouldn’t be any more quail to lay them.”

“But I’ve always done it,” whimpered Stripes, peeking over his shoulder
to see how Nibble was bristling. “And I only took two.”

“That’s as bad as taking them all. Do you suppose she’ll go back to them
now that she knows you’ve found them?” Nibble began to suspect that
Stripes really didn’t know any better after all, but this was no time to
teach him.

“Wouldn’t she if I promised never to do it again?” he asked hopefully.

“She wouldn’t believe you,” snapped Nibble decidedly. “Watch the Dog
gave you one chance even after you killed Tommy Peele’s little chicks.
Now you’ve been bad right over again. No one here ever will trust you.
You’d better go back where you came from as fast as you can
travel--Watch will certainly rage about this.”

“But I don’t wa-a-ant to go,” sniffed Stripes. “I want to stay right
here and learn how to behave. Way back in the Deep Woods I heard about
it. It’s the peacefulest place in the world----”

“So you came to see if you couldn’t make us a little trouble!” Nibble
was in a terrible temper. “Tried to lay all on poor Tad Coon, didn’t
you? You’d better foot it if you want to save your skin. That dog will
most certainly kill you.”

So off trudged Stripes with his head hanging. And Nibble hopped over to
the Quail’s Thicket just in time to hear them asking each other,
“Where’s Bob? Where IS Bob?”


                               CHAPTER X
                    STRIPES SKUNK BEGINS TO BE GOOD

You know quail live together in the winter but separate when they nest
in the spring. They mostly settle near enough together so that when
anything goes wrong the covey call can bring them all in. They help each
other if they can; if they can’t at least they learn about the danger to
those precious nests of their own.

But when Bob White’s wife gave that horrified “Prr-whit!” that a quail’s
ears can hear so far, her own husband did not come. The other birds
might scatter all over the woods and fields calling anxiously, “Bob
White, Bob White, Oh, Bob White!” but he did not answer.

Nibble was the only one who knew for sure who had taken the eggs. He
didn’t tell on Stripes Skunk--not yet, for fear the little owls would
hear of it. He called Chaik Jay and whispered, “Tell Watch the Dog to
find my trail and follow it.” Then he set out after Stripes. “That bad
killer knows what happened to Bob,” he said to himself. “I’m glad I
didn’t let him fool me a second time. He wanted me to persuade Bob’s
wife to go back to her nest and trust him--then he’d have caught her,
and maybe I wouldn’t be in trouble! Just maybe!” And he ran as fast as
ever he could.

But he was only half right. Stripes did know what had happened to Bob
White, but he wasn’t to blame for it. Instead he was doing his best to
help the poor bird. He was waddling back to the Quail’s Thicket with his
tongue hanging out the side of his mouth and his long hairy tail
waggling because he was too winded to gallop.

Nibble ran right straight into him. The first thing he said was, “What
are you doing here?” and the next was “What about Bob White Quail?”

And wasn’t Stripes s’prised? “How ever did you hear?” he gasped. “I
haven’t seen a single wing I could send for help, so I’ve ’most burst my
sides coming after you my own self. He’s hanging upside down from a
little tree. He’ll die if you don’t get him down soon. Hurry! Hurry!”

Hurry! You just better believe Nibble did. He knew what that meant. Bob
was caught in exactly the same kind of a snare that Tommy Peele had set
for Nibble. You remember he fastened a wire noose to the tip end of a
springy sapling, and then he bent it over and pegged it down. The minute
anything touched it, swish went the sapling and swish went whatever was
caught in that wicked wire. This one had tight hold of Bob White’s foot,
and there he hung with his head limp and his wings just weakly
fluttering.

[Illustration: Bob White was caught in Tommy Peele’s snare.]

“I guess I’ll have to try to gnaw through this tree,” said Nibble
anxiously. “I simply can’t climb.” And he looked at his furry feet that
are made to run.

Stripes looked at them, too, and then he looked at his own. You remember
the queer tracks he left up by the barn. His front feet were like a
dog’s but his hind ones were something like Tad Coon’s, and you know how
Tad could climb! “I never tried it,” he murmured doubtfully, “but maybe
I can.”

Nibble almost squealed. “If you can get up there and bend that top
down----” And right then Stripes clambered up on a log and sprang. He
caught in the lower branches, and then he began--well, Tad Coon or
Chatter Squirrel would never have called it climbing! It was scratch and
scramble and grunt and whine, but he kept right on. And the higher he
went the lower the sapling leaned. Down, down came Bob White till he lay
on the ground. Nibble had hardly touched his teeth to that wicked wire
when it let go its hold and Bob White was free. And just about then
Stripes Skunk let go, too, and came tumbling down on top of them.

There lay Bob White, too weak to fly, his eyes closed, and his poor
little thirsty beak half open. “Now,” thought Nibble, “that skunk is
going to try and eat him.” Of course that’s what any bad
Thing-from-under-the-Earth would do.

But Stripes didn’t. All that he scrunched was a couple of fat wood
snails. Pretty soon he found what he was looking for--a fat, juicy grub.
He knew Bob White would like it because skunks and birds eat so many of
the same things. And Bob White did. The minute he smelled it he opened
his eyes, and then he opened his beak. My, but that grub felt cool and
moist on his tongue when he gulped it in! But didn’t he start when he
saw who had given it to him?

And didn’t Nibble Rabbit prick up his ears when he heard what Stripes
Skunk was saying? “I broke up your nest and stole your eggs this
morning,” he told Bob White. “I thought maybe I’d pay you back even if I
can’t be trusted to kill mice and potato bugs to pay back for those
chickens of Tommy Peele’s I killed.” He still talked in his whiny,
discouraged voice.

“What’s that?” cheeped Bob. He simply couldn’t believe his ears. “Well,
I’ll be feathered! I’d as soon expect the Great Horned Owl to tell me
such a thing. Eggs? You’re perfectly welcome. It’s not too late to nest
over again. But for a skunk you’re certainly queer.”

“I--I--feel queer,” said Stripes in a funny, high voice, as though he
were going to cry. “I feel queer and different.”

“You just feel happy,” said Nibble. “And you’ll feel happier yet when
you’ve fixed those potato bugs for Tommy.”


                              CHAPTER XI
                    STRIPES CONTINUES HIS GOOD WORKS

You just ought to have heard the commotion in the Quail’s Thicket when
Bob White came whirring home with his wild tale. But do you think he
could make the quail believe that Stripes Skunk had helped Nibble Rabbit
set him free again? Not until Nibble Rabbit himself came hopping along
and told them exactly the same thing--only he gave Stripes all the
credit.

“Eggs! Eggs!” exclaimed Bob White’s wife when Stripes explained he was
trying to pay back because he’d mussed up her nest that morning. “What
are a couple of eggs? I’ll scrape them back into the nest and lay a
couple more in no time. I hadn’t begun to set on them.”

“Come along, Stripes,” said Nibble. “We must tell Doctor Muskrat. You
know he told Watch the Dog to try you. If the quail can trust you, I
guess I can. Your cousin Slyfoot the Mink would have eaten me long ago
if I’d come this close to him. Why didn’t you?”

“I was afraid,” Stripes owned up. “The little owls warned me that if I
did the dog would come after me. Anyway, I couldn’t catch you. Neither
could Slyfoot if you only knew it.

“You know,” he went on to explain, “we things from under the earth are
all scary--just as scary as you are. Only you’re so afraid of us that
you never remember we have any one to be afraid of. When Slyfoot chases
one of you silly bunnies you run round and round through the brush
trying to hide yourself from him. But as long as you hide he’s hidden,
too. All the time he’s trailing you. So he can take his time about
finding you--and he always does. Now if you’d run straight out in the
open, where the grass is short and there isn’t any place to hide, he
wouldn’t dare to follow. He knows the owl would get him.”

“If he didn’t get us first,” was Nibble’s sly comment.

“But you’ve got twice as many chances to get away. You can dodge and
run,” Stripes insisted. “Besides, your furry feet are so quiet; ours
make much more noise when we’re galloping. And the big owl hears you
before he looks for you.”

“He does?” Nibble exclaimed. “How do you know?”

“Why every one in the woods knows that an owl is either right-eared or
left-eared. And whichever ear he uses most, that side of his head gets
lop-sided from listening,” Stripes said.

“But his feathers are so fluffy I don’t see how any one would find out,
if it’s really so,” Nibble objected.

“Killer (he meant the big weasel) ate one,” grinned Stripes. “I guess he
ought to know. You see everything has something to be afraid of.”

They weren’t going very fast, Stripes was eating snails and licking
little clusters of insect eggs from the under sides of leaves and
digging grubs among the roots, while Nibble took a bite here and a bite
there as is the way with rabbits. “Everything has something to be afraid
of--and yet it’s terrible to be afraid,” he said.

“But if you’re not afraid, the others are afraid of you,” answered
Stripes. “You’re the only rabbit who ever scared me. When you got so
cross because I stole those quail eggs, I didn’t know what you’d do to
me. Honest I didn’t.”

“I didn’t, either,” Nibble giggled, remembering how funny Stripes looked
when he scrouched all up with his back turned and squinted over his
shoulder. “I was too angry with you for being so bad. What could I have
done, anyway?”

“I wouldn’t like you to kick me,” Stripes sniffed, nodding his head very
earnestly. “You’ve got picky claws on those big furry kickers of yours.
They’d rip a fellow worse than teeth do, and you’re awfully big for a
rabbit.”

“Am I?” asked Nibble in great surprise. “It’s a long time since I’ve
seen another bunny--not since the day my mother left me.”

“Well, you’ll see plenty before long, now that the news is going through
the Deep Woods that this is such a peaceful place.” By now they were
patting up the beach of Doctor Muskrat’s Pond. Stripes stopped suddenly.
“Wait a minute,” he exclaimed, “I’ve got to do something before I meet
the doctor.” And off he trotted, his long, hairy tail waggling behind
him.

“Peaceful?” thought Nibble. “He calls this peaceful when something’s
happening every minute. What must the Deep Woods and the Far Marshes be
if this is peaceful? Wonder what that hairy scamp is up to now?” But he
didn’t worry.

Pretty soon Stripes came running back with his mouth full. He laid a
mouse on the doctor’s flat stone and then he laid something else beside
it. “It’s so early,” he explained. “I had quite a hunt to find this
potato bug.”

And then didn’t Nibble laugh! And didn’t Doctor Muskrat? But Stripes was
deadly serious. “That’s to show you I mean to pay Tommy Peele for those
chicks. He’ll have to hunt harder than I did if he wants to find any
potato bugs after I’m through with them. I like being good, but how did
you know I’d like it?”

“Ahem,” Doctor Muskrat cleared his throat. “Way back in the First-Off
Beginning----”

And you know how that would please Nibble.


                              CHAPTER XII
                 DOCTOR MUSKRAT TELLS WHY SKUNKS ARE SO

“Way back in the First-Off Beginning,” said Doctor Muskrat impressively,
“there was one of the Things-from-under-the-Earth who really wanted to
be good----”

“The skunk!” exclaimed Nibble Rabbit. “Wasn’t it?”

“Was it?” asked Stripes Skunk.

Doctor Muskrat didn’t answer right away. He sat there sleeking his
whiskers with a clammy wet paw to hide a smile, and his little eyes were
twinkling. “I was just wondering,” he went on at last, “whether they
still tell this story in your family or whether you made up your mind on
your own account.”

“On my own account,” owned Stripes truthfully. “I got awfully scared at
what the little owls told me after you found out I’d been making trouble
for Tad Coon. And I got to thinking. Then it seemed as if I just had to
try how it would be to live so nice and peaceful--the way you want it.”
He was squirming a pebble in his paw and squinting down his pointy nose,
looking very much ashamed of himself.

“Ah,” cried Doctor Muskrat in a delighted voice. “That’s exactly the
story of the First Skunk in the First-Off Beginning. He was bad--just as
bad as all the other Things-from-under-the-Earth. He went running
around, making all the trouble he could, while Mother Nature was away
fixing up the other half of the world and this half all went wrong
again. You remember, Nibble, how the sun and the wind and the rain
didn’t take care of things the way she’d ordered them to, so winter
came, and the plants hid in the earth and wouldn’t be eaten, and her
very own new creatures got so terrible starvation hungry that some of
them took to eating each other--like the wolves ate the cows.

“All the Things-from-under-the-Earth wore scales in the First-Off
Beginning. When winter came most of them went right back under the earth
and they stayed scaly, and are to this very day. But some of them found
it was so easy to Mother Nature’s poor starved new creatures they
couldn’t bear to stop eating them. They didn’t bother picking their poor
lean bones; they just ate the tender parts that weren’t so starvation
thin--like brains. They drank blood, and it went to their heads, so at
last they killed for the sheer fun of killing.”

“Like Killer the Weasel,” nodded Stripes knowingly.

“Like some of Mother Nature’s own creatures, the wildcats and the
wolves,” said Doctor Muskrat. “And they didn’t care a bit who they were
killing, either. If the Things-from-under-the-Earth came near they took
after them. They took after the First Skunk whenever they came across
him--you’d better believe he was scared! The ground was so frozen by
that time that he couldn’t dig down into it. So he hid in a hollow tree,
with nothing but his scales on, and he was terribly cold and miserable
and unhappy. And that was the first thing that set him to thinking.”

“Think of being in a windy tree with nothing but a clammy coat of scales
on,” said Nibble, his teeth almost chattering. “Sometimes it’s bad
enough in the Pickery Things, and they surely keep the wind off.”

“Well, he didn’t suffer very long,” went on the old doctor. “The first
thing Mother Nature said was, ‘Any one can have fur that wants it.’ Now
she didn’t say ‘my own creatures,’ nor she didn’t say ‘except the Bad
Ones’--she just said ‘any one.’ And there was the First Skunk in a nice
warm suit of fur, looking like any of her own things, except that his
earholes were so far over the sides of his head his ears came too low
down--and so did those of all the Things-from-under-the-Earth; that’s
one way you can always tell them. And he was so happy. He said to
himself, ‘This is all I wanted,’ and he curled right up tight and fell
fast asleep.

“But when he woke up he began to think again. And by this time he could
think of several things he wanted. So he started out to find how he’d
get them. And it didn’t take him long to discover that he got his fur
because Mother Nature gave it to him; or to learn not to hunt her up
where she was busy trying to put things in order in this half of the
world again.

“She was fairly discouraged at the way the sun and the wind and the rain
had spoiled it and disgusted at the way some of her creatures had been
behaving--’specially the wolves, for eating the poor cows, you know. So
the First Skunk didn’t dare to trouble her; he just sat there listening.
And he thought and thought, until his head was tired, for the
Things-from-under-the-Earth aren’t used to thinking. Perhaps that’s why
they always stay Bad Ones----”

“It is!” Stripes interrupted. “It certainly is.” And his little low ears
were so pricked up over the idea that he didn’t look snaky and sneaky
any more, but just nice and pert and interested.

“Well, anyway,” continued Doctor Muskrat, “at last the First Skunk crept
up close and whined, ‘Won’t you have the earth fixed up the way it was
before very long? I want to ask something before you’re all done.’

“‘I can’t do that,’ she answered sadly, ‘because it’s been lived, so it
can’t be done over again. I’ll have to do the best I can with things as
they are. But who are you?’ She didn’t know him at all because he was so
different from the last time she’d seen him. But she knew right off from
his ears that she’d never made him.

“‘I’m the skunk,’ he answered. ‘This is my new fur you gave me this
morning!’ And then wasn’t she angry--angry with herself and angry with
him! It was hard enough to have the sun and the rain and the wind be so
careless that they let winter come, without having some of the Bad Ones
stay up from under the earth to hunt her poor beasts all through it. If
they had only scales on they couldn’t, but here was one with fur. Just
because she was so hurried and flustered she hadn’t stopped to think
what she’d been saying when she said ‘any one’ could have it.

“But the First Skunk didn’t know how she felt about it. He was so
pert and proud because he’d been thinking a little. He said, ‘I
like the way you want things. I want to be good and live up here
in the sun with your own creatures instead of going back down under
the Earth-that-is-common-to-all.’

“‘Well, be good, then,’ she snapped. She really didn’t believe him.

“‘But,’ he argued, ‘someone will have to show me how.’ You see her own
creatures were all made good, and they had to learn how to be bad from
the Bad Ones. A Bad One may want ever so much to be good, but he hasn’t
any idea where to begin.

“She didn’t stop to think of that. She thought he was just making
excuses, so she said, ‘You can stay up all winter now that you’ve got
fur. I don’t see why you need anything else.’

“‘Because I’m so small and so slow it’s terribly scary for me now that
your own beasts have taken to killing,’ he whimpered. ‘I don’t know how
to run away.’

“‘Oho!’ Mother Nature was very sarcastic, but he didn’t know enough to
know it. ‘You Bad Ones taught them how. I should think you’d be proud
over the way they’ve learned it. What else do you want, then?’

“‘Lots of things,’ answered the First Skunk more cheerfully. ‘Paws, for
instance.’”

“Did they have feet?” Stripes Skunk interrupted again. “Snakes haven’t.”

“They had then,” replied Doctor Muskrat; “splay-footed, lizardy ones.
The First Skunk wasn’t sure which he wanted, handy-paws like Tad Coon or
paddy ones like the wolves, so he could run away from them. He left all
that to Mother Nature. ‘Anyway you want to fix me,’ he said, ‘so I’m not
always being chased and they can’t hold me if they do catch me.’

“Mother Nature just stared at that First Skunk. ‘Well, of all the
impudence!’ she exclaimed. ‘Of all the impudence! There you are, then!’

“And there he was, indeed! Only he had paddy-paws on in front, where he
wanted the handy-ones, and Tad Coon’s paws behind, where he couldn’t run
on them, and a long, hairy tail no tooth could hang on to, and that
terrible scent so no one could even want to try. You can imagine how
that First Skunk felt!”


                             CHAPTER XIII
                          IN DEFENSE OF A LADY

“That poor First Skunk!” exclaimed Nibble Rabbit. “Mother Nature was
mean to give him everything he asked for just the opposite to the way he
wanted it. I’d have gone right off and been just as bad as ever I knew
how to be.”

“Eh, Stripes Skunk?” asked Doctor Muskrat, “is that how you feel about
it?”

“N-n-no,” Stripes answered slowly. “Being good is something even Mother
Nature couldn’t give the First Skunk; he’d have to get it for himself.
For the other things, I like being just the way we are. When I had to
climb the tree to help Bob White Quail I’d have liked the handy-paws the
First Skunk wanted. But that’s just because I’ve never practised
climbing, like my little cousin Spotty. And handy-paws are no earthly
good to dig with--you just ought to see these paddy-paws of mine make
the dirt fly. But paddy-paws behind, where he wanted them, wouldn’t be
half as nice as these good firm footy soles I stand on.

“I wouldn’t even give up my hairy tail. It’s heavy, but no one can bite
it, and it’s wonderful to sleep in.” He whisked it into a billowy rug
about his toes; then he finished contentedly, “I don’t mind Mother
Nature making us so we can’t chase other folks, seeing that she gave us
our scent so we’re not always being chased. She was perfectly fair.”

“Fair!” You ought to have seen Nibble turn his sniffy nose up at this.
“She played you a horrid kind of a joke.”

“Not at all!” answered Stripes--and he was really quite indignant. “We
don’t have to be unpleasant. Anyway, it’s better than fighting, and I
notice even you bunnies don’t like to be eaten. Only nobody but Doctor
Muskrat seems to understand.”

“Furry-foot,” chuckled that wise old beast, “Mother Nature played that
joke on a lot of other fellows besides the skunk. We were all of us
asking for scents, and she simply couldn’t understand it. She thought if
she gave the First Skunk that one, the rest of us wouldn’t want them.”

“Why did you?” Nibble wanted to know. “We didn’t.”

“You didn’t, didn’t you?” Doctor Muskrat’s little eyes twinkled. “Why do
you run around the Pickery Things each evening and give a stamp at every
tunnel?”

“So if any other rabbit comes he’ll know that the place belongs to me.”

“How will he know?” asked the doctor. “He mightn’t see you or hear
you----”

“He’d smell me, of course!” Nibble’s eyes were big and round.

“He would. Now do you see why nearly every one wanted some way of
leaving messages for other Woodsfolk while he went off to hide or feed?
You don’t dare make a noise; you can’t wait too long for fear someone
will see you; so you leave that little smelly mark that stays and stays
long after the warm smell of your body is blown away so you can’t be
followed. But you’re so used to it you never think about it.”

“Oh-h-h!” said Nibble. “I hadn’t thought of that. I guess I’m beginning
to understand.”

“I hope so,” sniffed the doctor. “Of course nobody’ll ever be wise
enough to know just how generous Mother Nature’s been. But remember, you
never nibble a clover leaf that you haven’t her to thank for it.”

Clover leaf! the bunny’s twitchy nose began to sniff for one. Stripes
Skunk cocked up one ear and looked at the Doctor with a little twinkle
in his eye. “I s’pose we can thank her for snails,” said he.
“’Cause----” Schloop! he licked a juicy one off the under side of a dock
leaf, “’cause at least (crunch! crunch!) we can run fast--enough--to
catch ’em.”

                                THE END

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAD COON'S TRICKS ***

***** This file should be named 64216-0.txt or 64216-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/6/4/2/1/64216/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
